
-----File: 001.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <sc>Waheenee and Her Husband, Son-of-a-Star</sc>]
-----File: 002.png---------------------------------------------------------




/F
WAHEENEE
AN INDIAN GIRL'S STORY

TOLD BY HERSELF
----TO----
GILBERT L. WILSON, Ph.D.

Field collector for the American Museum of Natural
History of New York City. Professor of Anthropology,
Macalester College.

Author of "Myths of the Red Children," "Goodbird,
the Indian," "The Agriculture of the Hidatsa Indians,"
"Indian Hero Tales."


ILLUSTRATED
BY
FREDERICK N. WILSON


<sc>Webb Publishing Company</sc>
<sc>St. Paul, Minnesota</sc>
1921
F/
-----File: 003.png---------------------------------------------------------




/*
COPYRIGHT, 1921
BY
WEBB PUBLISHING CO.
W ^1
*/
-----File: 004.png---------------------------------------------------------




FOREWORD


The Hidatsas, called Minitaris by the Mandans,
are a Siouan tribe and speak a language
closely akin to that of the Crows. Wars with
the Dakota Sioux forced them to ally themselves
with the Mandans, whose culture they adopted.
Lewis and Clark found the two tribes living in
five villages at the mouth of the Knife river, in
1804.

In 1832 the artist Catlin visited the Five Villages,
as they were called. A year later Maximilian
of Wiet visited them with the artist
Bodmer. Several score canvasses, the work of
the two artists, are preserved to us

Smallpox nearly exterminated the two tribes
in 1837-8. The survivors, a mere remnant, removed
to Fort Berthold reservation where they
still dwell.

In 1908, with my brother, an artist, I was
sent by Dr. Clark Wissler, Curator of Anthropology,
American Museum of Natural History,
to begin cultural studies among the Hidatsas.
This work, continued through successive summers
for ten years, is but now drawing to a
close.
-----File: 005.png---------------------------------------------------------

During these years my faithful interpreter
and helper has been Edward Goodbird, grandson
of Small Ankle, a chief of the Hidatsas in the
trying years following the terrible smallpox winter;
and my principal informants have been
Goodbird's mother, <i>Waheenee-wea</i>, or Buffalo-Bird
Woman, and her brother, Wolf Chief.

The stories in this book were told me by
Buffalo-Bird Woman. A few told in mere outline,
have been completed from information given
by Wolf Chief and others.

Illustrations are by my brother, from studies
made by him on the reservation. They have
been carefully compared with the Catlin and
Bodmer sketches. Not a few are redrawn from
cruder sketches by Goodbird, himself an artist
of no mean ability.

Acknowledgment is made of the courtesy
of Curator Wissler, whose permission makes possible
the publishing of this book.

Indians have the gentle custom of adopting
very dear friends by relationship terms. By
such adoption Buffalo-Bird Woman is my mother.
It is with real pleasure that I offer to young
readers these stories from the life of my Indian
mother.

/*
G. L. W.
*/
-----File: 006.png---------------------------------------------------------




CONTENTS


/X
Chapter      Page

I A Little Indian Girl      7

II Winter Camp      15

III The Buffalo-skin Cap      21

IV Story Telling      29

V Life in an Earth Lodge      44

VI Childhood Games      54

VII Kinship, Clan Cousins      66

VIII Indian Dogs      73

IX Training a Dog      81

X Learning to Work      90

XI Picking June Berries      99

XII The Corn Husking      109

XIII Marriage      117

XIV A Buffalo Hunt      127

XV The Hunting Camp      138

XVI Homeward Bound      149

XVII An Indian Papoose      156

XVIII The Voyage Home      165


Glossary of Indian Words      177

Explanatory Notes      178


<sc>Supplement</sc>:--

How to Make an Indian Camp      183

Hints to Young Campers      187

Indian Cooking      188

Editor's Note      189
X/
-----File: 007.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 008.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




WAHEENEE




FIRST CHAPTER

A LITTLE INDIAN GIRL


I was born in an earth lodge by the mouth
of the Knife river, in what is now North Dakota,
three years after the smallpox winter.

The Mandans and my tribe, the Hidatsas,
had come years before from the Heart river; and
they had built the Five Villages, as we called
them, on the banks of the Knife, near the place
where it enters the Missouri.

Here were bottom lands for our cornfields
and cottonwood trees for the beams and posts
of our lodges. The dead wood that floated down
either river would help keep us in firewood, the
old women thought. Getting fuel in a prairie
country was not always easy work.
-----File: 009.png---------------------------------------------------------

When I was ten days old my mother made a
feast and asked an old man named Nothing-but-Water
to give me a name. He called me.[** ,][**probably speck, not punctuation F2] Good
Way. "For I pray the gods," he said, "that
our little girl may go through life by a <i>good way</i>;
that she may grow up a good woman, not quarreling
nor stealing; and that she may have good
luck all her days."

[Illustration]

I was a rather sickly child and my father
wished after a time to give me a new name.
We Indians thought
that sickness was
from the gods. A
child's name was
given him as a kind
of prayer. A new
name, our medicine
men thought, often
moved the gods to
help a sick or weakly
child.

So my father gave
me another name,
<i>Waheenee-wea</i>,[1] or
Buffalo-Bird Woman.
In our Hidatsa
language, <i>waheenee</i>, means cowbird, or buffalo-bird,
as this little brown bird is known in the buffalo
country; <i>wea</i>, meaning girl or woman, is often
added to a girl's name that none mistake it for the
name of a boy. I do not know why my father chose
this name. His gods, I know, were birds; and these,
we thought, had much holy power. Perhaps the
buffalo-birds had spoken to him in a dream.

[Footnote 1: Wä h[=e][=e]´ n[=e][=e] w[=e]´ a]
-----File: 010.png---------------------------------------------------------

I am still called by the name my father gave
me; and, as I have lived to be a very old woman,
I think it has brought me good luck from the
gods.

My mother's name was <i>Weahtee</i>.[1] She was
one of four sisters, wives of my father; her sisters'
names were Red Blossom, Stalk-of-Corn,
and Strikes-Many Woman. I was taught to
call all these my mothers. Such was our Indian
custom. I do not think my mother's sisters
could have been kinder to me if I had been an
own daughter.

I remember nothing of our life at the Five
Villages; but my great-grandmother, White Corn,
told me something of it. I used to creep into
her bed when the nights were cold and beg for
stories.

"The Mandans lived in two of the villages,
the Hidatsas in three," she said. "Around each
village, excepting on the side that fronted the
river, ran a fence of posts, with spaces between
for shooting arrows. In front of the row of
posts was a deep ditch.

"We had corn aplenty and buffalo meat to
eat in the Five Villages, and there were old people
and little children in every lodge. Then
smallpox came. More than half of my tribe
died in the smallpox winter. Of the Mandans
only a few families were left alive. All the old
people and little children died."

I was sad when I heard this story. '[** "]Did
any of your family die, grandmother?" I asked.

[Footnote 1: W[=e]´ äh t[=e][=e][** .][**no period--so far ftns consistent in not ending with period F2]]
-----File: 011.png---------------------------------------------------------

"Yes, my husband, Yellow Elk, died. So
many were the dead that there was no time to
put up burial scaffolds; so his clan fathers bore
Yellow Elk to the burying
ground and laid him
on the grass with logs
over him to keep off the
wolves.

[Illustration]

"That night the villagers
heard a voice calling
to them from the
burying ground. '<i>A-ha-hey!</i>[1]
I have waked up.
Come for me.'

"'It is a ghost,' the
villagers cried; and they
feared to go.

"Some brave young
men, listening, thought
they knew Yellow Elk's voice. They went to
the burying ground and called, 'Are you alive,
Yellow Elk?'

"'Yes,' he answered, 'I have waked up!'

"The young men rolled the logs from his
body and bore Yellow Elk to the village; he
was too weak to walk."

This story of Yellow Elk I thought wonderful;
but it scared me to know that my great-grandfather
had been to the ghost land and had come
back again.

Enemies gave our tribes much trouble after
the smallpox year, my grandmother said. Bands

[Footnote 1: Ä h[ä] h[e=][**?]y´]
-----File: 012.png---------------------------------------------------------
of Sioux waylaid hunting parties or came prowling
around our villages to steal horses. Our
chiefs, Mandan and Hidatsa, held a council
and decided to remove farther up the Missouri.
"We will build a new village," they agreed,
"and dwell together as one tribe."

The site chosen for the new village was a
place called Like-a-Fishhook Point, a bit of
high bench land that jutted into a bend of the
Missouri. We set out for our new home in the
spring, when I was four years old. I remember
nothing of our march thither. My mothers
have told me that not many horses were then
owned by the Hidatsas, and that robes, pots,
axes, bags of corn and
other stuff were
packed on the backs of
women or on travois
dragged by dogs.

[Illustration]

The march was
led by the older
chiefs and medicine
men. My grandfather
was one of them. His name was Missouri
River. On the pommel of his saddle hung his
medicines, or sacred objects, two human skulls
wrapped in a skin. They were believed to be
the skulls of thunder birds, who, before they died,
had changed themselves into Indians. After the
chiefs, in a long line, came warriors, women, and
children. Young men who owned ponies were
sent ahead to hunt meat for the evening camp.
Others rode up and down the line to speed the
-----File: 013.png---------------------------------------------------------
stragglers and to see that no child strayed off to
fall into the hands of our enemies, the Sioux.

The earth lodges that the Mandans and
Hidatsas built, were dome-shaped houses of
posts and beams, roofed over with willows-and-grass,
and earth; but every family owned a tepee,
or skin tent, for use when[**comma removed F1] hunting or traveling.
Our two tribes camped in these tents the first
summer at Like-a-Fishhook Point, while they
cleared ground for cornfields.

The labor of clearing was done chiefly by
the women, although the older men helped.
Young men were expected to be off fighting our
enemies or hunting buffaloes. There was need
for hunting. Our small, first year's fields could
yield no large crops; and, to keep from going
hungry in the winter months, we must lay in a
good store of dried meat. We owned few guns
in the tribe then; and hunting buffaloes with
arrows was anything but sport. Only young
men, strong and active, made good hunters.

My mothers were hard-working women, and
began their labor of clearing a field almost as
soon as camp was pitched. My grandmother,
Turtle, chose the ground for the field. It was
in a piece of bottom land that lay along the
river, a little east of the camp. My mothers
had brought seed corn from the Five Villages;
and squash, bean and sunflower seed.

I am not sure that they were able to plant
much corn the first season. I know they planted
some beans and a few squashes. I am told
that when the squash harvest came in, my
-----File: 014.png---------------------------------------------------------
grandmother picked out a long green-striped
squash for me, for a doll baby. I carried this
about on my back, snuggled under my buffalo-calf
robe, as I had seen Indian mothers carry
their babies. At evening I wrapped my dolly
in a bit of skin and put her to bed.

[Illustration]

Our camp on a summer's evening was a
cheerful scene. At this hour, fires burned
before most of the tepees; and, as the women had
ended their day's labors,
there was much
visiting from tent to
tent. Here a family
sat eating their evening
meal. Yonder, a
circle of old men,
cross-legged or squat-*on-heels
in the firelight,
joked and told
stories. From a big
tent on one side of
the camp came the <i>tum-tum tum-tum</i> of a drum.
We had dancing almost every evening in those
good days.

But for wee folks bedtime was rather early.
In my father's family, it was soon after sunset.
My mothers had laid dry grass around the
tent wall, and on this had spread buffalo skins
for beds. Small logs, laid along the edge of
the beds, caught any sparks from the fireplace;
for, when the nights grew chill, my mothers
made their fire in the tepee. My father often
sat and sang me to sleep by the firelight.
-----File: 015.png---------------------------------------------------------

He had many songs. Some of them were
for little boys: others were for little girls. Of
the girls' songs, there was one I liked very
much; it was something like this:

/P
My sister asks me to go out and stretch the smoke-flap.
    My armlets and earrings shine!
I go through the woods where the elm trees grow.
    Why do the berries not ripen?
What berries do you like best?--the red? the blue?
P/

This song I used to try to sing to my squash
doll, but I found it hard to remember the words.

[Illustration: this is a test]
-----File: 016.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




SECOND CHAPTER

WINTER CAMP


The medicine men of the two tribes had laid
out the plan of our new village when they made
camp in the spring. There was to be an open
circle in the center, with the lodges of the chiefs
and principal men opening upon it; and in the
center of the circle was to stand the Mandans'
sacred corral. This corral was very holy.
Around it were held solemn dances, when young
men fasted and cut their flesh to win favor of
the gods.

The early planning of the village by our
medicine men made it possible for a woman to
choose a site and begin building her earth lodge.
Few lodges, however, were built the first summer.
My mothers did not even begin building
theirs; but they got ready the timbers with
which to frame it.
-----File: 017.png---------------------------------------------------------

Going often into the woods with their dogs
to gather firewood, they kept a sharp lookout
for trees that would make good beams or posts;
these they felled later, and let lie to cure. For
rafters, they cut long poles; and from cottonwood
trunks they split puncheons for the sloping
walls. In olden days puncheons were split
with wedges of buffalo horn. A core of hard
ash wood was driven into the hollow horn to
straighten it and make it solid.

Autumn came; my mothers harvested
their rather scanty crops; and, with the moon
of Yellow Leaves, we struck tents and went into
winter camp. My tribe usually built their winter
village down in the thick woods along the
Missouri, out of reach of the cold prairie winds.
It was of earth lodges, like those of our summer
village, but smaller and more rudely put together.
We made camp this winter not very far
from Like-a-Fishhook Point.

My father's lodge, or, better, my mothers'
lodge,--for an earth lodge belonged to the women
who built it--was more carefully constructed
than most winter lodges were. Earth was heaped
thick on the roof to keep in the warmth; and
against the sloping walls without were leaned
thorny rosebushes, to keep the dogs from climbing
up and digging holes in the roof. The fireplace
was a round, shallow pit, with edges plastered
smooth with mud. Around the walls stood
the family beds, six of them, covered each with
an old tent skin on a frame of poles.
-----File: 018.png---------------------------------------------------------

A winter lodge was never very warm; and, if
there were old people or children in the family,
a second, or "twin lodge," was often built. This
was a small lodge with roof peaked like a tepee,
but covered with bark and earth. A covered
passage led from it to the main lodge.

The twin lodge had two uses. In it the
grandparents or other feeble or sickly members
of the family could sit, snug and warm, on the
coldest day; and the children of the household
used it as a playhouse.

I can just remember playing in our twin
lodge, and making little feasts with bits of boiled
tongue or dried berries that my mothers gave me.
I did not often get to go out of doors; for I was
not a strong little girl, and, as the winter was a
hard one, my mothers were at pains to see that
I was kept warm. I had a tiny robe, made of
a buffalo-calf skin, that I drew over my little
buckskin dress; and short girls' leggings over
my ankles. In the twin lodge, as in the larger
earth lodge, the smoke hole let in plenty of fresh air.

My mothers had a scant store of corn and
beans, and some strings of dried squashes; and
they had put by two or three sacks of dried
prairie turnips. A mess of these turnips was
boiled now and then and was very good. Once,
I remember, we had a pudding, dried prairie
turnips pounded to a meal and boiled with dried
June berries. Such a pudding was sweet, and
we children were fond of it.

To eke out our store of corn and keep the
pot boiling, my father hunted much of the time.
-----File: 019.png---------------------------------------------------------
To hunt deer he left the lodge before daybreak,
on snowshoes, if the snow was deep. He had a
flintlock gun, a smoothbore with a short barrel.
The wooden stock was studded with brass nails.
For shot he used slugs, bits
of lead which he cut from
a bar, and chewed to make
round like bullets. Powder
and shot were hard to get
in those days.

[Illustration]

Buffaloes were not
much hunted in winter,
when they were likely to
be poor in flesh; but my
father and his friends made
one hunt before midwinter
set in. Buffaloes were hunted with bow and
arrows, from horseback. Only a fleet pony
could overtake a buffalo, and there were not
many such owned in the tribe. We thought a
man rich who had a good buffalo horse.

My father stabled his horses at night in our
lodge, in a little corral fenced off against the
wall. "I do not want the Sioux to steal them,"
he used to say. In the morning, _after break-*

*fast_, he drove them out upon the prairie, to pasture,
but brought them in again before sunset.
In very cold weather my mothers cut down young
cottonwoods and let our horses browse on the
tender branches.

Early in the spring our people returned to
Like-a-Fishhook Point and took up again the
labor of clearing and planting fields. Each fam-*
-----File: 020.png---------------------------------------------------------
*ily had its own field, laid out in the timbered
bottom lands along the Missouri, if possible, in
a rather open place where there were no large
trees to fell.

[Sidenote: test]

Felling trees and grubbing out bushes were
done with iron tools, axes and heavy
hoes, gotten of the traders.
I have heard that in
old times my tribe
used stone axes, but I
never saw them myself.
Our family field
was larger than any
owned by our neighbors;
and my mothers
were at pains to add to
it, for they had many
mouths to feed. My
grandmother, Turtle, helped them, rising at the
first sound of the birds to follow my mothers to
the field.

     *     *     *     *     *
	 
Turtle was old-fashioned in her ways and did
not take kindly to iron tools. "I am an Indian,"
she would say, "I use the ways my fathers used."
Instead of grubbing out weeds and bushes, she
pried them from the ground with a wooden digging
stick. I think she was as skillful with this
as were my mothers with their hoes of iron.

Digging sticks are even yet used by old
Hidatsa women for digging wild turnips. The
best kind is made of a stout ash sapling, slightly
bent and trimmed at the root end to a three-*
*cornered
point. To harden the point, it is oiled
-----File: 021.png---------------------------------------------------------
with marrow fat, and a bunch of dry grass is
tied around it and fired. The charring makes
the point almost as hard as iron.

[Illustration]

Turtle, I think, was the last woman in the
tribe to use an old-fashioned,
bone-bladed
hoe. Two other old
women owned such
hoes, but no longer used
them in the fields. Turtle's
hoe was made of
the shoulder bone of a
buffalo set in a light-*wood
handle, the blade
firmly bound in place
with thongs. The
handle was rather short,
and so my grandmother stooped as she worked
among her corn hills.

She used to keep the hoe under her bed. As
I grew a bit older my playmates and I thought
it a curious old tool, and sometimes we tried to
take it out and look at it, when Turtle would cry,
"<i>Nah, nah!</i>[1] Go away! Let that hoe alone; you
will break it!"

We children were a little afraid of Turtle.

[Illustration]

[Footnote 1: Näh]
-----File: 022.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




THIRD CHAPTER

THE BUFFALO-SKIN CAP


The winter I was six years old my mother,
<i>Weahtee</i>, died.

The Black Mouths, a men's society, had
brought gifts to One Buffalo and asked him to be
winter chief. "We know you own sacred objects,
and have power with the gods," they said. "We
want you to pray for us and choose the place for
our camp."

One Buffalo chose a place in the woods at
the mouth of Many-Frogs Brook, three miles
from Like-a-Fishhook village. I remember our
journey thither. There was a round, open place
in the trees by Many-Frogs Brook, where young
men fasted and made offerings to the gods. It
was a holy place; and One Buffalo thought, if
we pitched our winter camp near-by, the gods
would remember us and give us a good winter.
-----File: 023.png---------------------------------------------------------

But it was a hard winter from its start. Cold
weather set in before we had our lodges well
under cover; and, with the first snow, smallpox
broke out in camp. Had it been in summer, my
tribe could have broken up into small bands and
scattered; and the smallpox would have died
out. This they could not do in winter, and many
died. My brother, my mother <i>Weahtee</i>, and her
sister Stalk-of-Com, died,
of my father's family.

[Illustration]

Although my old
grandmother was good to
me, I often wept for my
mother. I was lonesome
in our winter lodge, and
we Indian children did not
have many playthings.
Old Turtle made me a
dolly of deer skin stuffed
with antelope hair. She
sewed on two white bone
beads for eyes. I bit off one of these bone beads,
to see if it was good to eat, I suppose. For some
days my dolly was one-eyed, until my grandmother
sewed on a beautiful new eye, a blue
glass bead she had gotten of a trader. I thought
this much better, for now my dolly had one
blue eye and one white one.

I liked to play with my father's big hunting
cap. It was made of buffalo skin, from the part
near the tail where the hair is short. He wore
it with the fur side in. Two ears of buffalo skin,
stuffed with antelope hair to make them stand
-----File: 024.png---------------------------------------------------------
upright, were sewed one on each side. They
were long, to look like a jack rabbit's ears; but
they looked more like the thumbs of two huge
mittens. My father, I think, had had a dream
from the jack-rabbit spirits, and wore the cap
as a kind of prayer to them. Jack rabbits are
hardy animals and fleet of foot. They live on
the open prairies through the hardest winters;
and a full grown rabbit can outrun a wolf. An
Indian hunter had need to be nimble-footed and
hardy, like a jack rabbit.

Small Ankle thought his cap a protection
in other ways. It kept his head warm. Then,
if he feared enemies were about, he could draw
his cap down to hide his dark hair, creep up a
hill and spy over the top. Being of dull color,
like dead grass, the cap was not easily seen on
the sky line. A Sioux, spying it, would likely
think it a coyote, or wolf, with erect, pointed
ears, peering over the hill, as these animals
often did. There were many such caps worn
by our hunters; but most of them had short
pointed ears, like a coyote'[**typo? missing s. or .][**P2: coyote's.]

My father sometimes hung his cap, wet with
snow, on the drying poles over the fire to dry.
I would watch it with longing eyes; and, when
I thought it well warmed, I would hold up my
small hands and say, "Father, let me play
with the cap." I liked to sit in it, my small
ankles turned to the right, like an Indian woman's;
for I liked the feel of the warm fur against
my bare knees. At other times I marched about
the lodge, the big cap set loosely on my head,
-----File: 025.png---------------------------------------------------------
and my dolly thrust under my robe on my back.
In doing this I always made my grandmother
laugh. "Hey, hey," she would cry, "that is a
warrior's cap. A little girl can not be a warrior."

The winter, if hard, was followed by an
early spring. Snow was thawing and flocks of
wild geese were flying north a month before
their wonted time. The women of the Goose
Society called the
people for their
spring dance,
and prayed the
gods for good
weather for the
corn planting.
One Buffalo sent
a crier through
the lodges, warning
us to make
ready to break
camp. On the day set, we all returned to Like-a-Fishhook
village, glad to leave our stuffy little
winter lodges for our roomy summer homes.

[Illustration]

One morning, shortly after our return, my
father came into the lodge with two brave men,
Flying Eagle and Stuck-by-Fish. My grandfather,
Big Cloud, joined them. Big Cloud
lighted a pipe, offered smoke to the gods, and
passed the pipe to the others. It was a long
pipe with black stone bowl. The four men
talked together. I heard my father speak of a
war party and that he was sure his gods were
strong.
-----File: 026.png---------------------------------------------------------

Toward evening, Red Blossom boiled meat
and set it before the men. When they had eaten,
Small Ankle rose and went to his medicine bag,
that hung in the rear of the lodge. He held
out his hands and I saw his lips move; and I
knew he was praying. He opened the medicine
bag and took out a bundle which he unrolled.
It was a black bear's skin, painted red. He
bore the skin reverently out of the lodge, and
came back empty-handed. Flying Eagle and
Stuck-by-Fish rose and left the lodge.

My father sat by the fire awhile, silent.
Then from a post of his bed he fetched his hunting
cap. "I shall need this cap," he said to Red
Blossom. "See if it must be sewed or mended
in any place."

[Illustration]

The next morning
when I went out of
the lodge, I saw that
the black-bear skin
was bound to one of
the posts at the entrance.
This was a
sign that my father
was going to lead out
a war party. I was
almost afraid to pass
the bear skin, for I
knew it was very holy.

For days after,
young men came to
our lodge to talk with my father and Big Cloud.
My mothers--for so I called Red Blossom and
-----File: 027.png---------------------------------------------------------
Strikes-Many Woman--had the pot boiling all
the time, to give food to the young warriors.

One night I was in bed and asleep, when I
woke with a start, hearing low voices. Peeping
out, I saw many young men sitting around
the fireplace. The fire had died down, but the
night was clear and a little light came through
the smoke hole. Many of the young men had
bows and well-filled quivers on their backs. A
few had guns.

Some one struck flint and steel, and I saw by
the glow of the burning tobacco that a pipe was
being passed. The men were talking low,
almost in whispers. Then I heard Big Cloud's
voice, low and solemn, praying: "Oh gods,
keep watch over these our young men. Let
none of them be harmed. Help them strike
many enemies and steal many horses."

The company now arose and filed out of the
lodge. As the skin door fell shut after them,
I heard the whinny of Small Ankle's war pony
without. Next morning, I learned that Small
Ankle and Big Cloud had led out a war party,
all mounted, to strike the northern Sioux.

The ice on the Missouri river broke, and
ran out with much crashing and roaring. Some
dead buffaloes, frozen in the ice, came floating
down the current. Our brave young men, leaping
upon the ice cakes, poled the carcasses to
shore. We were glad to get such carcasses.
Buffaloes killed in the spring were lean and poor
in flesh; but these, frozen in the ice, were fat
and tender.
-----File: 028.png---------------------------------------------------------

A good many frozen carcasses were thus
taken at the spring break-up. In the fall the
rivers froze over, often with rather thin ice.
A herd would come down to the river's edge
and stand lowing and grumbling, until some
bold bull walked out upon the ice. The whole
herd followed, often breaking through with their
weight.

The weather stayed warm. Bushes in the
woods had begun to leaf, and old Turtle even
raked part of our
field and planted
sunflower seed around
the border. "We never
saw such an early
spring," said some of
the old men.

Then, one night,
a cold wind arose with
rain turning to snow.
I woke up, crying
out that I was chilled.
My grandmother, who
slept with me, pulled
over us an extra robe she had laid up on the
top of the bed frame.

[Illustration]

The next morning a terrible blizzard broke
over our village. The wind howled overhead,
driving the falling snow in blinding clouds.
Red Blossom drew her robe over her head and
went to the entrance to run over to our next
neighbor's; but she came back. "I am afraid
to go out," she said. "The air is so full of snow
-----File: 029.png---------------------------------------------------------
that I can not see my hand when I hold it before
my face. I fear I might lose my way, and
wander out on the prairie and die." There
were stories in the tribe of villagers who had
perished thus.

Old Turtle and Strikes-Many Woman made
ready our noon meal--no easy thing to do; for
the cold wind, driving down the smoke hole,
blew ashes into our faces and into our food.
An old bull-boat frame was turned over the
smoke hole. Against it, on the windward side,
my mothers had laid a buffalo skin the night
before, weighting it down with a stone. This
was to keep the wind from blowing smoke down
the smoke hole; but the wind had shifted in the
night, blowing the buffalo skin off the boat
frame. The weight of the stone had sunk one
end of the skin into the earth roof, where it had
frozen fast; and we could hear the loose end
flapping and beating in the wind. Little snow
came down the smoke hole. The wind was so
strong that it carried the snow off the roof.

Turtle and Strikes-Many Woman had gone
with dogs for firewood only the day before; so
there was plenty of fuel in the lodge. We
could not go to get water at the river; but Red
Blossom crept into the entrance way and filled
a skin basket with snow. This she melted in a
clay pot, for water. It was in this water that
we boiled our meat for the midday meal. In
spite of the calf skin that my grandmother belted
about me, I shivered with the cold until my
teeth chattered. Turtle poured some of the
-----File: 030.png---------------------------------------------------------
meat broth, steaming hot, into a wooden bowl,
and fetched me a buffalo-horn spoon. With
this spoon I scooped up the broth, glad to swallow
something hot into my cold little stomach.

After our meal, my two mothers and Turtle
sat on my father's couch, looking grave. "I
hope Small Ankle and Big Cloud have reached
shelter in the Missouri-river timber," I heard
Red Blossom say. "If they are on the prairie
in this storm, they will die."

"Big Cloud's prayers are strong," answered
Turtle, "and Small Ankle is a good plainsman.
I am sure they and their party will find shelter."

"I knew a Mandan who was caught in a blizzard,"
said Red Blossom. "He walked with
the wind until he fell into a coulee, that was
full of snow. He burrowed under the drifts
and lay on his back, with his knees doubled
against his chin and his robe tight about him.
He lay there three days, until the storm blew
over. He had a little parched corn for food;
and, for drink, he ate snow. He came home
safely; but his mouth was sore from the snow
he had eaten."

Darkness came early, with the wind still
screaming overhead. Turtle tried to parch some
corn in a clay pot, but blasts from the smoke
hole blew ashes into her eyes. She took out a
handful of the half-parched corn, when it had
cooled, and poured it into my two hands. This
was my supper; but she also gave me a lump of
dried chokecherries to eat. They were sweet
and I was fond of them.
-----File: 031.png---------------------------------------------------------

I awoke the next morning to see my mothers
cooking our breakfast, parched-corn meal stirred
into a thick mush with beans and marrow
fat. I sprang out of bed and glanced up at
the smoke hole. The sky, I saw, was clear
and the sun was shining.

The second day after, about midafternoon,
Small Ankle came home. I heard the tinkle of
the hollow hoofs that hung on the skin door, and
in a moment my father came around the fire
screen leading his war pony, a bay with a white
nose. He put his pony in the corral, replaced
the bar, and came over to his couch by the fire.
My mothers said nothing. Red Blossom put
water and dried meat in a pot and set it on the
fire, and Turtle fetched an armful of green cottonwood
bark to feed the pony.

My father took off his big cap and hung it
on the drying pole, and wrung out his moccasins
and hung them beside the cap. They were winter
moccasins, and in each was a kind of stocking,
of buffalo skin turned fur in, and cut and
sewed to fit snugly over the foot. These stockings
Small Ankle drew out and laid by the fire,
to dry. He put on dry moccasins, threw off his
robe, and took upon his knees the bowl of broth
and meat that Red Blossom silently handed him.

In the evening, some of his cronies came in
to smoke and talk. Small Ankle told them of
his war party.

"We had a hard time," he said. "Perhaps
the gods, for some cause, were angry with us.
We had gone five days; evening came and it
-----File: 032.png---------------------------------------------------------
began to rain. We were on the prairie, and our
young men sat all night with their saddles and
saddle skins over their heads to keep off the rain.

"In the morning, the rain turned to snow.
A heavy wind blew the snow in our faces, nearly
blinding us.

"'We must make our way to the Missouri
timber and find shelter,'
Big Cloud said.

"Flying Eagle
feared we could not
find our way. 'The
air is so full of snow
that we can not see the
hills,' he said.

[Illustration]

"'The wind will
guide us,' said Stuck-by-Fish.
'We know
the Missouri river is
in the south. The
wind is from the west. If we travel with the
wind on our right, we shall be headed south.
We should reach the river before night.'

"I thought this a good plan, and I cried, 'My
young men, saddle your horses.' We had flat
saddles, such as hunters use. We had a few
bundles of dried meat left. These we bound
firmly to our saddles, for we knew we could kill
no game while the storm lasted.

"Many of my young men had head cloths
which they bound over their hair and under their
chins; but the wind was so strong that it blew
the wet snow through the cloths, freezing them
-----File: 033.png---------------------------------------------------------
to the men's faces. I had on my fur cap, which
kept my face warm. Also, I think the jack-*rabbit
spirits helped me.

"We pushed on; but the snow got deeper and
deeper until we could hardly force our ponies
through it. We grew so chilled that Big Cloud
ordered us to dismount and go afoot. 'You go
first,' he said to Flying Eagle. 'You are a tall
man and have long legs. You break the way
through the snow. We will follow single-file.'

"Flying Eagle did so, leading his pony. With
Flying Eagle had come his brother, Short Buffalo,
a lad of fourteen or fifteen years. He was not
yet grown, and his legs were so short that he
could not make his way through the deep snow.
We let him ride.

"But in a little while Short Buffalo cried out,
'My brother, I freeze; I die!'

"Flying Eagle called back, 'Do not give up,
little brother. Be strong!' And he came back
and bound Short Buffalo's robe snugly about his
neck, and took the reins of his pony, so that
Short Buffalo could draw his hands under his
robe to warm them. Short Buffalo's robe had
frozen stiff in the cold wind.

"We reached the Missouri before nightfall
and went down into the thick timber. It was
good to be out of the freezing wind, sheltered by
the trees.

"Flying Eagle led us to a point of land over
which had swept a fire, killing the trees. Many
dead cottonwoods stood there, with shaggy bark.
We peeled off the thick outer bark, shredding
-----File: 034.png---------------------------------------------------------
the dry inner bark for tinder. I had flint and
steel. We rolled over a fallen trunk and started
a fire on the dry ground beneath. We broke off
dead branches for fuel.

"Flying Eagle helped me get wood and start
the fire. He is a strong man and bore the cold
better than the others. Many of the men were
too benumbed to help any. My mittens and
my cap had kept me warm.

"The men's leggings, wetted by rain and
snow, were frozen stiff. We soon had a hot fire.
When their leggings had thawed soft, the men
took off these and their moccasins, and wrung
them out; and when they had half dried them by
the fire, put them on again. They also put
shredded cottonwood bark in their moccasins,
packing it about their feet and ankles to keep
them warm and dry.

"We toasted dried meat over the fire, and
ate; for we were hungry, and weak from the
cold. We fed our ponies green cottonwood
branches that we cut with our knives.

"The storm died down before morning; and
early the next day we started down the river
to our village. We were slow coming, for the
snow thawed, growing soft and slushy under
our ponies' feet. Our ponies, too, were weak
from the cold."

Many of the young men of my father's
party had their faces frozen on the right side.
Short Buffalo had part of his right hand frozen,
and his right foot. He was sick for a long
time. Another war party that had been led
-----File: 035.png---------------------------------------------------------
out by Wooden House had also been caught
in the storm and had fared even worse. They
were afoot, and, not being able to reach the
river timber, they lay down in a coulee and let
the snow drift over them. Two were frozen
to death.

The leaders of a war party were held to
blame for any harm that came to their men.
The villagers, however, did not blame my father
much. Some of the older men said, "Small
Ankle and Big Cloud were foolish. The wild
geese had come north, but this fact alone was
not proof that winter had gone. We know that
bad storms often blow up at this season of the
year."

Of course, being but six years old, I could
hardly remember all these things. But my
father talked of his war party many times afterwards,
at his evening fire, as he smoked with
his cronies; and so I came to know the story.

[Illustration]
-----File: 036.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




FOURTH CHAPTER

STORY TELLING


My good old grandmother could be stern
when I was naughty; nevertheless, I loved her
dearly, and I know she was fond of me. After
the death of my mother, it fell to Turtle to
care for me much of the time. There were
other children in the household, and, with so
many mouths to feed, my two other mothers,
as I called them, had plenty of work to do.

Indians are great story tellers; especially
are they fond of telling tales around the lodge
fire in the long evenings of autumn and winter.
My father and his cronies used sometimes to
sit up all night, drumming and singing and telling
stories. Young men often came with gift
of robe or knife, to ask him to tell them tales
of our tribe.

I was too young yet to understand many of
these tales. My father was hours telling some
-----File: 037.png---------------------------------------------------------
of them, and they had many strange words.
But my grandmother used to tell me stories as
she sat or worked by the lodge fire.

One evening in the corn planting moon,
she was making ready her seed for the morrow's
planting. She had
a string of braided ears
lying beside her. Of
these ears she chose the
best, broke off the tip
and butt of each, and
shelled the perfect grain
of the mid-cob into a
wooden bowl. Baby-like,
I ran my fingers through
the shiny grain, spilling a
few kernels on the floor.

[Illustration]

"Do not do that," cried my grandmother.
"Corn is sacred; if you waste it, the gods will
be angry."

I still drew my fingers through the smooth
grain, and my grandmother continued: "Once
a Ree woman went out to gather her corn.
She tied her robe about her with a big fold in
the front, like a pocket. Into this she dropped
the ears that she plucked, and bore them off
to the husking pile. All over the field she went,
row by row, leaving not an ear.

"She was starting off with her last load when
she heard a weak voice, like a babe's, calling,
'Please, please do not go. Do not leave me.'

"The woman stopped, astonished. She put
down her load. 'Can there be a babe hidden
-----File: 038.png---------------------------------------------------------
in the corn?' she thought. She then carefully
searched the field, hill by hill, but found nothing.

"She was taking up her load, when again
she heard the voice: 'Oh, please do not go.
Do not leave me!' Again she searched, but
found nothing.

"She was lifting her load when the voice
came the third time: 'Please, please, do not
go! Please, do not leave me!'

"This time the woman searched every corn
hill, lifting every leaf. And lo, in one corner of
the field, hidden under a leaf, she found a tiny
nubbin of yellow corn. It was the nubbin that
had been calling to her. For so the gods would
teach us not to be wasteful of their gifts."

Another evening I was trying to parch an
ear of corn over the coals of our lodge fire. I
had stuck the ear on the end of a squash spit,
as I had seen my mothers do; but my baby
fingers were not strong enough to fix the ear
firmly, and it fell off into the coals and began
to burn. My mouth puckered, and I was
ready to cry.

My grandmother laughed. "You should put
only half the ear on the spit," she said. "That
is the way the Mandans did when they first
gave us corn."

I dropped the spit and, forgetting the burning
ear, asked eagerly, "How did the Mandans
give us corn, grandmother. Tell me the story."

Turtle picked up the spit and raked the
burning ear from the ashes. "I have told you
-----File: 039.png---------------------------------------------------------
that the gods gave us corn to eat, not to waste,"
she said. "Some of the kernels on this cob are
well parched." And she shelled off a handful
and put one of the hot kernels in her mouth.

"I will tell you the story," she continued.
"I had it from my mother when I was a little
girl like you.

"In the beginning, our Hidatsa people lived
under the waters of Devils Lake. They had
earth lodges and lived much as we live now.
One day some hunters found the root of a
grapevine growing down from the lake overhead.
They climbed the vine and found themselves
on this earth. Others climbed the vine
until half the tribe had escaped; but, when a
fat woman tried to climb it, the vine broke,
leaving the rest of the tribe under the lake.

"Those who had safely climbed the vine,
built villages of earth lodges. They lived by
hunting; and some very old men say that they
also planted small fields in ground beans and
wild potatoes. As yet the Hidatsas knew nothing
of corn or squashes.

"One day, a war party that had wandered
west to the Missouri river saw on the other
side a village of earth lodges like their own.
It was a village of the Mandans. Neither they
nor the Hidatsas would cross over, each party
fearing the other might be enemies.

"It was in the fall of the year, and the Missouri
was running low, so that an arrow could
be shot from shore to shore. The Mandans
parched some ears of ripe corn with the grain
-----File: 040.png---------------------------------------------------------
on the cob. These ears they broke in pieces,
stuck the pieces on the points of arrows and
shot them across the river.
'Eat!' they called. The word
for 'eat' is the same in both
the Hidatsa and the Mandan
languages.

[Illustration]

"The Hidatsas ate of the
parched corn. They returned
to their village and said, 'We
have found a people on a great
river, to the west. They have
a strange kind of grain. We
ate of it and found it good.'

"After this, a party of
Hidatsas went to visit the
Mandans. The Mandan chief
took an ear of corn, broke it in
two, and gave half to the Hidatsas
for seed. This half ear the Hidatsas
took home, and soon every family
in the village was planting corn."

My father had been listening, as
he sat smoking on the other side of
the fire. "I know that story," he
said. "The name of the Mandan
chief was Good-Fur Robe."

My grandmother then put me to bed. I
was so sleepy that I did not notice she had
eaten up all the corn I had parched.

Winter came again, and spring. As soon as
the soil could be worked, my mothers and old
-----File: 041.png---------------------------------------------------------
Turtle began cleaning up our field, and breaking
new ground to add to it. Our first year's
field had been small; but my mothers added to it
each season, until the field was as large as our
family needed.

I was too little to note very much of what
was done. I remember that my father set up
boundary marks--little piles of earth or stones,
I think they were--to mark the corners of the
field we claimed. My mothers and Turtle
began at one end of the field and worked forward.
My mothers had their heavy iron hoes;
and Turtle, her old-fashioned digging stick.

On the new ground, my mothers first cut
the long grass with their hoes, bearing it off
the field to be burned. They next dug and loosened
the soil in places for the corn hills, which
they laid off in rows. These hills they planted.
Then all summer in this and other parts of the
field they worked with their hoes, breaking and
loosening the soil between the corn hills and
cutting weeds.

Small trees and bushes, I know, were cut
off with axes; but I remember little of this
labor, most of it having been done the year
before, when I was yet quite small. My father
once told me that in very old times, when the
women cleared a field, they first dug the corn
hills with digging sticks, and afterwards worked
between them with their bone hoes.

I remember this season's work the better
for a dispute that my mothers had with two
neighbors, Lone Woman and Goes-Back-to-Next-*
-----File: 042.png---------------------------------------------------------
*Timber. These two women were clearing lands
that bordered our own. My father, I have said,
to set up claim to our land, had placed boundary
marks, one of them in the corner that touched
the fields of Lone Woman and Goes-Back-to-Next-Timber.
While my mothers were busy
clearing and digging up the other end of their
field, their two neighbors invaded this marked-off
corner. Lone Woman had even dug up a
small part before she was discovered.

My mothers showed Lone Woman the mark
my father had placed. "This land belongs to
us," they said; "but we will pay you and Goes-Back-to-Next-Timber
for any rights you may
think are yours. We do not want our neighbors
to bear us any hard feelings."

We Indians thought our fields sacred, and we
did not like to quarrel about them. A family's
right to a field once having been set up, no one
thought of disputing it. If any one tried to seize
land belonging to another, we thought some evil
would come upon him; as that one of his family
would die or have some bad sickness.

There is a story of a hunter who had before
been a black bear, and had been given great magic
power. He dared try to catch eagles from
another man's pit, and had his mind taken from
him for doing so. Thus the gods punished him
for entering ground that was not his own.

Lone Woman and Goes-Back-to-Next-Timber
having withdrawn, my grandmother Turtle undertook
to clear and break the ground that had been
in dispute. She was a little woman but active,
-----File: 043.png---------------------------------------------------------
and she loved to work out-of-doors. Often, when
my mothers were busy in the earth lodge, Turtle
would go out to work in the field, and she would
take me along for company. I was too little to
help her any, but I liked to watch her work.

With her digging stick Turtle dug up a little
round place in the center of the corner, and
around this she circled
from day to day, enlarging
the dug-up space. She
had folded her robe over
her middle, like a pad.
Resting the handle of her
digging stick against her
folded robe, she would
drive the point into the
soft earth to a depth
equal to the length of my
hand and pry up the soil.

[Illustration]

She broke clods by
striking them smartly
with her digging stick. Roots of coarse grass,
weeds, small brush and the like, she took in her
hand and shook or struck them against the ground,
to knock off the loose earth clinging to them. She
then cast them into little piles to dry. In a few
days she gathered these piles into a heap about
four feet high and burned them.

My grandmother worked in this way all summer,
but not always in the corner that had been
in dispute. Some days, I remember, she dug
along the edges of the field, to add to it and make
the edges even. Of course, not all the labor of
-----File: 044.png---------------------------------------------------------
enlarging the field was done by Turtle; but she
liked to have me with her when she worked, and
I remember best what I saw her do.

It was my grandmother's habit to rise early
in the summer months. She often arrived at the
field before sunrise; about ten o'clock she returned
to the lodge to eat and rest.

One morning, having come to the field quite
early, I grew tired of my play before my grandmother
had ended her work. "I want to go
home," I begged, and I began to cry. Just then
a strange bird flew into the field. It had a long
curved beak, and made a queer cry, <i>cur-lew, cur-lew</i>.

I stopped weeping. My grandmother laughed.

"That is a curlew," she said. "Once at the
mouth of the Knife river, a woman went out with
her digging stick to dig wild turnips. The woman
had a babe. Growing tired of carrying her
babe on her back, she laid it on the ground.

"The babe began to cry. The mother was
busy digging turnips, and did not go to her babe
as she should have done. By and by she looked
up. Her babe was flying away as a bird!

"The bird was a curlew, that cries like a babe.
Now, if you cry, perhaps you, too, will turn into
a curlew."

[Illustration]
-----File: 045.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




FIFTH CHAPTER

LIFE IN AN EARTH LODGE


The small lodges we built for winter did not
stand long after we left them in the spring.
Built on low ground by the Missouri, they were
often swept away in the June rise; for in that
month the river is flooded by snows melting in
the Rocky Mountains.

The loss of our winter lodges never troubled
us, however; for we thought of them as but huts.
Then, too, we seldom wintered twice in the same
place. We burned much firewood in our winter
lodges, and before spring came the women had
to go far to find it. The next season we made
camp in a new place, where was plenty of dead-and-down
wood for fuel.

We looked upon our summer lodges, to
which we came every spring, as our real homes.
There were about seventy of these, earth lodges
-----File: 046.png---------------------------------------------------------
well-built and roomy, in Like-a-Fishhook village.
Most of them were built the second summer
of our stay there.

My mothers' earth lodge--for the lodge
belonged to the women of a household--was a
large one, with floor measuring more than forty
feet across. In the center was the fireplace.
A screen of puncheons, set upright in a trench,
stood between the fireplace and the door. This
screen shut out draughts and kept out the dogs.

The screen ran quite to the sloping wall,
on the right; but, on the left, there was space for
a passage from the door to the fire. Right and
left in an Indian lodge are reckoned as one
stands at the fireplace, looking toward the door.
We thought an earth lodge was alive and had
a spirit like a human body, and that its front
was like a face, with
the door for mouth.

[Illustration]

Before the fireplace
and against the
puncheon screen was
my father's bed.
Forked posts, eighteen
inches high, stood in
the earth floor. On
poles laid in the forks
rested cotton-wood[**P1 typo cottonwood?]
planks over which
were thrown buffalo robes. A skin pillow, stuffed
with antelope hair, lay at one end of the bed.

The beds of the rest of the family stood in
the back of the lodge, against the wall. They
-----File: 047.png---------------------------------------------------------
were less simply made than my father's, being
each covered with an old tent skin drawn over
a frame of posts and poles. The bedding was
of buffalo skins. As these could not be washed,
my mothers used to
take them out and
hang them on the poles
of the corn stage on
sunny days, to air.

[Illustration]

Most of the earth
lodges--at least most
of the larger ones--had
each a bed like
my father's before the
fireplace; for this was
the warmest place in
the lodge. Usually
the eldest in the family,
as the father or grandfather, slept in this bed.

My father's bed, not being enclosed, made
a good lounging place by day, and here he sat
to smoke or chat with his friends. My mothers,
too, used to sit here to peel wild turnips or
make ready the daily meals.

Two or three sticks burned in the fireplace,
not piled one upon the other as done by white
men, but laid with ends meeting. As the ends
burned away, the sticks were pushed in, keeping
alive a small but hot fire. At night, the
last thing my father did was to cover one of
these burning sticks with ashes, that it might
keep fire until morning.
-----File: 048.png---------------------------------------------------------

Unless he had spent the night with some of
his cronies, my father was the first to rise in
the morning. He would go to the fireplace,
draw out a buried coal, lay some dry sticks
upon it, and blow with his breath until the
fire caught. Sometimes he fanned the coal with
a goose wing.

Soon a little column of smoke would rise
toward the smoke hole, and my father would
call, "Up, little daughter; up, sons! Get up,
wives! The sun is up. To the river for your
bath! Hasten!" And he would go up on the
roof to look if enemies were about and if his
horses were safe. My mothers were already
up when I crept from my bed still sleepy, but
glad that morning had come.

[Illustration]

But if the weather was cold, we did not go
to the river to bathe. An earthen pot full of
water stood by one of the
posts near the fire. It rested
in a ring of bark, to keep it
from falling. My mothers
dipped each a big horn spoon
full of water, filled her mouth,
and, blowing the water over
her palms, gave her face a
good rubbing. Red Blossom
washed my face in the
same way. I did not like it very much, and I
would shut my eyes and pucker my face when
I felt the cold water. Red Blossom would say,
"Why do you pucker up your face? You make
it look like a piece of old, dried, buffalo skin."
-----File: 049.png---------------------------------------------------------

Her face washed, Red Blossom sat on the
edge of her bed and finished her toilet. She
had a little fawn-skin bag, worked with red
porcupine quills. From this bag she took her
hairbrush, a porcupine
tail mounted on a stick,
with the sharp points of
the quills cut off. She
brushed her hair smooth,
parting it in two braids
that fell over each
shoulder nearly hiding
her ears. Red Blossom
was no longer young, but her black tresses had
not a grey hair in them.

[Illustration]

She now opened her paint bag, put a little
buffalo grease on her two fingers, pressed the
tips lightly in the dry paint, and rubbed them
over her cheeks and face. She also rubbed a
little red into the part of her hair.

Meanwhile, the pot had been put on the fire.
We Indians did not eat many things at a meal as
white men do. Usually, breakfast was of one
thing, often buffalo meat dried, and boiled to soften
it. When a buffalo was killed, the meat was
cut into thin slices, and some parts, into strips.
These were dried in the open air over the earth
lodge fire or in the smoke of a small fire out-of-doors.
For breakfast, a round earthen pot was
filled with water, dried meat put in, and the
water brought to a boil. Red Blossom used to
lift out the hot meat slices on the point of a
stick, laying them on a bit of clean rawhide.
-----File: 050.png---------------------------------------------------------

A rough bench stood back of the fireplace,
a cottonwood plank, with ends resting on two
blocks chopped from a tree trunk. My grandmother
Turtle sat on this bench to eat her meals.
My two mothers sat beside her, or on the floor
near the meat they were serving. My father ate
sitting on the edge of his couch. A wooden
bowl, heaped with steaming meat, was set
before each. Our fingers did for forks.

Boiling the meat in water made a thin broth
which we used for a hot drink. It was very
good, tasting much like white man's beef tea.
We had no cups; but we had big spoons made
of buffalo horn, and ladles, of mountain-sheep
horn. Either of these did very well for drinking
cups. Sometimes we used mussel shells.

A common breakfast dish was <i>mapee[1] naka-*pah</i>,[2]
or pounded-meal mush. From her cache
pit Red Blossom took a string of dried squash
slices. She cut off a length and tied the ends
together, making a ring four or five inches in
width. This ring and a double handful of
beans she dropped in a pot of water, and set
on the fire. When boiled, she lifted the ring
out with a stick, with her horn ladle mashed the
softened squash slices in a wooden bowl and put
them back in the pot.

Meanwhile Strikes-Many Woman or old Turtle
had parched some corn in a clay pot, and
toasted some buffalo fats on a stick, over the
coals. Red Blossom now pounded the parched
corn and toasted fats together in the corn mortar,
and stirred the pounded mass into the pot with

[Footnote 1: mä p[=e][=e]´]

[Footnote 2: nä kä päh´]
-----File: 051.png---------------------------------------------------------
the squash and beans. The mess was soon
done. Red Blossom dipped it into our bowls
with a horn spoon.

We ate such messes with horn spoons or
with mussel shells; for we Hidatsas had
few metal spoons in those days. There
was a shelf, or bench, at one side of the
room, under the sloping
roof, where were stored
wooden bowls, uneaten
foods, horn spoons, and
the mussel shells that
we used for teaspoons.
When I was a little girl, nearly every family owned
such shells, worn smooth and shiny from use.

[Illustration]

After breakfast, unless it was in the corn season,
when they went to the field, my mothers
tidied up the lodge. They had short brooms
of buckbrush. With these they swept the floor,
stooping over and drawing the broom with a
sidewise motion. As my father stabled his
hunting ponies in the lodge at night, there was
a good deal of litter to be taken out. Red
Blossom used to scrape her sweepings into a
skin basket, which she bore to the river bank
and emptied.

Other tasks were then taken up; and there
were plenty of them. Moccasins had to be
made or old ones mended. Shirts and other
garments had to be made. Often there were
skins to be dressed or scraped. Leggings and
shirts were embroidered usually in winter, when
the women had no corn to hoe.
-----File: 052.png---------------------------------------------------------

There was a good deal of visiting in our lodge;
for my father was one of the chiefs of the village,
and always kept open house. "If a man would
be chief," we said, "he should be ready to feed
the poor and strangers." A pot with buffalo
meat or corn and beans cooking was always
on the fire in my father's lodge. His friends
and the other chief men of the village often
came in to talk over affairs. A visitor came in
without knocking, but did not sit down until
he was asked.

Friends of my mothers also came in to sit and
chat; and they often joined my mothers at
whatever task they might be doing. Red Blossom
would set a bowl of food before each.
What she could not eat the guest took home
with her. It was impolite to leave any uneaten
food, as that would mean, "I do not like your
cooking; it is unfit to eat."

My mothers were neat housekeepers and
kept the ground about the lodge entrance swept
as clean as the lodge floor; but many families
were careless, and cast ashes, floor sweepings,
scraps of broken bones and other litter on the
ground about their lodges. In time this rubbish
made little piles and became a nuisance, so that
people could hardly walk in the paths between
the lodges.

The Black Mouths then went through the
village and ordered the women to clean up.
The Black Mouths were a society of men of
about forty years of age. They acted as police
and punished any one who broke the camp laws.
-----File: 053.png---------------------------------------------------------

These clean-ups were made rather often; in
summer, perhaps twice a month. They were
always ordered by the Black Mouths.

I remember one morning, just after breakfast,
I heard singing, as of a dozen or more men
coming toward our lodge. I
started to run out to see what
it was, but my mothers cried,
"Do not go. It is the Black
Mouths." My mothers, I
thought, looked rather scared.
We were still speaking, when I
heard the tramp of feet. The
door lifted, and the Black
Mouths came in.

[Illustration]

They looked very terrible,
all painted with the lower half
of the face black. Many, but
not all, had the upper half of
the face red. Some had eagles'
feathers in their hair, and all
wore robes or blankets. Some
carried guns. Others had sticks about as long as
my arm. With these sticks they beat any woman
who would not help in the clean-up.

I fled to my father, but I dared not cry out,
for I, too, was scared.

"One of you women go out and help clean
up the village," said the Black Mouths. They
spoke sternly, and several of them at once.

Like all the other women, my mothers were
afraid of the Black Mouths "We will go,"
-----File: 054.png---------------------------------------------------------
said both, and Red Blossom caught up broom
and skin basket and went out.

The Black Mouths went also, and I followed
to see what they did. They went into another
lodge not far away. I heard voices, then the
report of a gun, and a woman screamed. After
a time, the Black Mouths came out driving
before them a woman, very angry, but much
frightened. She had not moved quickly enough
to get her basket, and one of the Black Mouths
had fired his gun at her feet to frighten her.
The gun was loaded only with powder.

After they had made the rounds of the village,
the Black Mouths returned to the lodge
of their "keeper," a man named Crow Paunch.
Soon we heard singing and drumming, and
knew they were singing some of the society's
songs.

When they had sung three or four times,
there was silence for a while, as if a pipe were
being passed. Then all came out and made
the rounds a second time, to see if the work
of cleaning was done and to hurry up the laggards.
The village was all cleaned before noon;
but some of the women got their work done
sooner than others.

After the clean-up the village children came
out to play in the spaces between the lodges,
now swept clean and smooth. It was in these
smooth spaces that the boys liked to play at
throw sticks, light willow rods which they
darted against the ground, whence they bounded
to a great distance.
-----File: 055.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




SIXTH CHAPTER

CHILDHOOD GAMES AND BELIEFS


White people seem to think that Indian
children never have any play and never laugh.
Such ideas seem very funny to me. How can
any child grow up without play? I have seen
children at our reservation school playing white
men's games--baseball, prisoners' base, marbles.
We Indian children also had games. I
think they were better than white children's
games.

I look back upon my girlhood as the happiest
time of my life. How I should like to see
all my little girl playmates again! Some still
live, and when we meet at feasts or at Fourth-of-July
camp, we talk of the good times we had
when we were children.

My little half sister was my usual playmate.
She was two years younger than I, and I loved
-----File: 056.png---------------------------------------------------------
her dearly. She had a pretty name, Cold Medicine.
On our prairies grows a flower with long,
yellow root. In old times, if a warrior was running
from enemies and became wearied he
chewed a bit of the root and rubbed it on his
eyelids. It made his eyes and tongue feel cold
and kept him awake. The flower for this reason
was called cold medicine. When my father
spoke my sister's name, it made him think of
this flower and of the many times he had bravely
gone out with war parties.

[Illustration]

For playgrounds my little sister and I had
the level spaces between the lodges or the
ground under the corn stage, in sunny weather;
and the big, roomy floor of the earth lodge,
if it rained or the
weather were chill.
We liked, too, to
play in the lodge in
the hot days of the
Cherry moon; for it
was cool inside,
never hot and stuffy
like a white man's
house. In the fall,
when the air was
frosty, the sun often
shone, and we could
play in the big yellow sunspot that fell on the
floor through the smoke hole.

We liked to play at housekeeping, especially
in the warm spring days, when we had returned
from winter camp and could again play out-of-*
-----File: 057.png---------------------------------------------------------
*doors. With the help of the neighbors' children,
we fetched long forked sticks. These we
stacked like a tepee frame and covered with
robes that we borrowed. To this play tent we
brought foods and had a feast.

Sometimes little boys joined in our play;
and then it was like real housekeeping. We
girls chose each a little boy for husband. To
my little husband I said, "Old man, get your
arrows, and go kill some buffaloes. We are
hungry. Go at once!"

My little husband hastened to his mother
and told her our needs. She laughed and gave
him a boiled buffalo tongue; or perhaps pemmican,
dried meat pounded fine and mixed
with marrow fat. This and the foods which
the other little husbands fetched us, we girls
laid on fresh, clean grass that we pulled. Then
we sat down to feast, the little girls on one side
of the fireplace, the little boys on the other,
just as we had seen men and women sit when
they feasted. Only there really was no fireplace.
We just made believe there was.

In summer, my little sister and I often went
to the river for wet clay, which we modeled into
figures. There is a smooth, blue clay found
in places at the water's edge, very good for
modeling. We liked best to make human figures,
man, woman, or little child. We dried
them in the shade, else the sun cracked them.
I fear they were not very beautiful. When we
made a mud man, we had to give him three
legs to make him stand up.
-----File: 058.png---------------------------------------------------------

I had a doll, woven of rushes, that Turtle
made me. It really was not a doll, but a cradle,
such as Indian women used for carrying a
small child. In winter I had my deer-skin
doll, with the beads for eyes. My grandmother
had made me a little bed for my dolls.
The frame was of willows, and it was covered
with gopher skins, tanned and sewed together.
In this little bed my sister and I used to put our
dollies to sleep.

We had a game of ball much like shinny. It
was a woman's game, but we little girls played
it with hooked sticks. We also had a big, soft
ball, stuffed with antelope
hair, which we would
bounce in the air with the
foot. The game was to see
how long a girl could
bounce the ball without
letting it touch the ground.
Some girls could bounce it
more than a hundred times.
It was lots of fun.

[Illustration]

We coasted in winter,
on small sleds made of
buffalo ribs; but coasting
on the snow was rather for boys and older
girls. There was another kind of coaster that we
girls liked. A buffalo skin has the hair lying
backwards, towards the flanks. I would borrow
a skin of my mothers and tie a thong through
two of the stake holes at the head or neck, to
draw it by. Such a skin made a good coaster even
-----File: 059.png---------------------------------------------------------
in summer on a steep hillside; for, laid head forward,
it slid smoothly over the soft grass.

Girls of thirteen or fourteen were fond of
playing at "tossing in a blanket," or "foot-*moving,"
as we called
it. There were fifteen
or twenty players. A
newly dried skin was
borrowed, one that
was scraped clean of
hair. There were always
holes cut in the
edges of a hide, to
stake it to the ground
while drying. Into
each hole a small hard
wood stick was now
thrust and twisted
around, for a handle.

[Illustration]

Along the ditch at
the edge of the village
grew many tall weeds. The players pulled
armfuls of these and made them into a pile.
They laid the hide on this pile of weeds; and,
with a player at every one of the stick handles,
they stretched the hide taut.

A girl now lay downward on the hide. With
a quick pull, the others tossed her into the air,
when she was expected to come down on her
feet, to be instantly tossed again. The game
was to see how many times she could be tossed
without falling. A player was often tossed
ten or more times before she lost her balance.
-----File: 060.png---------------------------------------------------------
Each time, as she came down, she kept turning
in one direction, right or left. When at last
she fell, the pile of weeds saved her from any
hurt.

We called the game <i>eetseepadahpakee</i>,[1] or
foot-moving,[** see prior page] from the player's habit of wriggling
her feet when in the air. We thought this
wriggling, or foot moving, a mark of skill.

But, if my mothers let me play much of the
time, they did not forget to teach me good
morals. "We are a family that has not a bad
woman in it," they used to say. "You must
try hard not to be naughty."

My grandfather Big Cloud often talked to
me. "My granddaughter," he would say, "try
to be good, so that you will grow up to be a
good woman. Do not quarrel nor steal. Do
not answer anyone with bad words. Obey
your parents, and remember all that I say."

When I was naughty my mothers usually
scolded me; for they were kind women and did
not like to have me punished.
Sometimes they scared me into
being good, by saying, "The
owl will get you." This saying
had to do with an old custom
that I will explain.

[Illustration]

Until I was about nine
years old, my hair was cut short,
with a tuft on either side of my
head, like the horns of an owl. Turtle used to
cut my hair. She used a big, steel knife. In
old times, I have heard, a thin blade of flint was

[Footnote 1: [=e][=e]t s[=e][=e] pä däh´ pä k[=e][=e]]
-----File: 061.png---------------------------------------------------------
used. I did not like Turtle's hair cutting
a bit, because she <i>pulled</i>.

"Why do you cut my hair, grandmother?"
I asked.

"It is our custom," Turtle answered. "I
will tell you the story."

"Thousands and thousands of years ago,
there lived a great owl. He was strong and
had magic power, but he was a bad bird. When
the hunters killed buffaloes, the owl would turn
all the meat bitter, so that the Indians could
not eat it, and so they were always hungry.

"On this earth then lived a young man
called the Sun's Child; for the sun was his
father. He heard how the Indians were made
hungry, and came to help them.

"The owl lived in a hollow tree that had a
hole high up in its trunk. The Sun's Child
climbed the tree, and when the owl put his head
out of the hole, he caught the bird by the neck.

"'Do not let the Sun's Child kill me!' the
owl cried to the Indians. 'I have been a bad
bird; now I will be good and I will help your
children.

"'As soon as a child is old enough to understand
you when you speak to him, cut his hair
with two tufts like my own. Do this to make
him look like an owl; and I will remember and
make the child grow up strong and healthy.
If a child weeps or will not obey, say to him,
"The owl will get you!" This will frighten him,
so that he will obey you.'"
-----File: 062.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Plate I.--Offering food before the shrine of the Big Birds' ceremony]
-----File: 063.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 064.png---------------------------------------------------------

It was thus my mothers frightened me when
I was naughty. Red Blossom would call, "O
owl, I have a bad daughter. Come."

"I will be good, I will be good!" I would
cry, as I ran to my father. I knew he would
not let the owl hurt me.

My old grandfather, Missouri River, taught
me of the gods. He was a medicine man and
very holy, and I was rather afraid of him. He
used to sit on the bench behind the fire, to
smoke. He had a long pipe, of polished black
stone. He liked best to smoke dried tobacco
blossoms which he first oiled with buffalo fat.

One day, as he
sat smoking, I asked
him, "Grandfather,
who are the gods?"

[Illustration]

Missouri River
took a long pull at
his pipe, blew the
smoke from his nostrils,
and put the
stem from his mouth.
"Little granddaughter,"
he answered,
"this earth is alive
and has a soul or
spirit, just as you
have a spirit. Other things also have spirits, the
sun, clouds, trees, beasts, birds. These spirits are
our gods. We pray to them and offer them food,
that they may help us when we have need."
-----File: 065.png---------------------------------------------------------

"Do the spirits eat the food![**P1 typo ?]" I asked. I
had seen my grandfather set food before the
two skulls of the Big Birds' ceremony.

"No," said my grandfather, "They eat the
food's spirit; for the food has a spirit as have all
things. When the gods have eaten of its spirit,
we often take back the food to eat ourselves."

"How do we know there are gods, grandfather?"
I asked.

"They appear to us in our dreams. That
is why the medicine man fasts and cuts his
flesh with knives. If he fasts long, he will fall
in a vision. In this vision the gods will come
and talk with him."

"What are the gods like?" I asked.

"Like beings that live on this earth. Some
are as men. Others are as birds, or beasts, or
even plants and other things. Not all the gods
are good. Some seek to harm us. The good
gods send us buffaloes, and rain to make our
corn grow."

"Do they send us thunder?" I asked. There
had been a heavy storm the day before.

"The thunder bird god sends us thunder," said
my grandfather. "He is like a great swallow,
with wings that spread out like clouds. Lightning
is the flash of his eyes. His scream makes
the thunder.

"Once in Five Villages," my grandfather
went on, "there lived a brave man who owned a
gun. One day a storm blew up. As the man
sat in his lodge, there came a clap of thunder and
lightning struck his roof, tearing a great hole.
-----File: 066.png---------------------------------------------------------

"This did not frighten the man at all.
Indeed, it angered him. He caught up his gun
and fired it through the hole straight into the
sky. 'You thunder bird,' he shouted, 'stay
away from my lodge. See this gun. If you
come, I will shoot at you again!'"

My grandfather paused to fill his pipe.
"That was a brave man," he said as he reached
for a coal. "Perhaps the thunder bird loves
brave men, and did not harm him. But it is
not well to provoke the gods. My little granddaughter
should never laugh at them nor speak
of them lightly."

My grandfather spoke very solemnly.

[Illustration]
-----File: 067.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




SEVENTH CHAPTER

KINSHIP, CLAN COUSINS


We Hidatsas do not reckon our kin as
white men do. If a white man marries, his
wife is called by his name; and his children also,
as Tom Smith, Mary Smith. We Indians had
no family names. Every Hidatsa belonged to
a clan; but a child, when he was born, became a
member of his mother's, not his father's clan.

An Indian calls all members of his clan his
brothers and sisters. The men of his father's
clan he calls his clan fathers; and the women,
his clan aunts. Thus I was born a member of
the <i>Tsistska</i>[1], or Prairie Chicken clan, because
my mother was a <i>Tsistska</i>. My father was a
member of the <i>Meedeepahdee</i>,[2] or Rising Water
clan. Members of the <i>Tsistska</i> clan are my
brothers and sisters; but my father's clan brothers,
men of the <i>Meedeepahdee</i>, are my clan
fathers, and his clan sisters are my clan aunts.

[Footnote 1: Tsïst´ skä]

[Footnote 2: M[=e][=e] d[=e][=e] päh´ d[=e][=e]]
-----File: 068.png---------------------------------------------------------

These relations meant much to us Indians.
Members of a clan were bound to help one
another in need, and thought the gods would
punish them if they did not. Thus, if my mother
was in need, members of the <i>Tsistska</i> clan helped
her. If she was hungry, they gave her food.
If her child was naughty, my mother called in a
<i>Meedeepahdee</i> to punish him, a clan father, if
the child was a boy; if a girl, a clan aunt; for
parents did not punish their own children.
Again, when my father died, his clan fathers
and clan aunts it was, who bore him to the burial
scaffold and prayed his ghost not to come
back to trouble the villagers.

Another clan relative is <i>makutsatee</i>,[1] or clan
cousin. I reckon as my clan cousins all members
of my tribe whose fathers are my clan
fathers. Thus, my mother, I have said, was a
Prairie Chicken; my father, a member of the
<i>Meedeepahdee</i>, or Rising Water, clan. Another
woman, of what clan does not matter, is also
married to a <i>Meedeepahdee</i>; her children will be
my clan cousins, because their father, being a
<i>Meedeepahdee</i>, is my clan father.

Clan cousins had a custom that will seem
strange to white people. We Indians are proud,
and it makes our hearts sore if others make mock
of us. In olden times if a man said to his friend,
even in jest, "You are like a dog," his friend
would draw his knife to fight. I think we Indians
are more careful of our words than white men are.

But it is never good for a man not to know his
faults, and so we let one's clan cousins tease him

[Footnote 1: mä k[u:]t´ sä t[=e][=e]]
-----File: 069.png---------------------------------------------------------
for any fault he had. Especially was this teasing
common between young men and young women.
Thus a young man might be unlucky in war.
As he passed the fields where the village women
hoed their corn, he
would hear some mischievous
girl, his clan
cousin, singing a song
taunting him for his
ill success. Were any
one else to do this,
the young man would
be ready to fight; but,
seeing that the singer
was his clan cousin,
he would laugh and
call out, "Sing louder
cousin, sing louder,
that I may hear you."

[Illustration]

I can best explain
this custom by telling you a story:


Story of Snake Head-Ornament

A long time ago, in one of our villages at
Knife river, lived a man named <i>Mapuksaokihe</i>,[1]
or Snake Head-Ornament. He was a great
medicine man. In a hole in the floor of his
earth lodge, there lived a bull snake. Snake
Head-Ornament called the bull snake "father."

When Snake Head-Ornament was invited
to a feast, he would paint his face, wrap himself
in his best robe and say, "Come, father;
let us go and get something to eat."

[Footnote 1: Mä p[u:]k´ sä [=o] k[=e][=e] h[)e]]
-----File: 070.png---------------------------------------------------------

The bull snake would creep from his hole,
crawl up the man's body and coil about his
neck, thrusting his head over the man's forehead;
or he would coil about the man's head like the
headcloth of a hunter, with his head thrust
forward, as I have said.

Bearing the snake thus on his head, Snake
Head-Ornament would enter the lodge where
the feast was held and sit down to eat. The
snake, however, did not eat of the food that
Snake Head-Ornament ate. The snake's food
was scrapings of buffalo hides that the women
of the lodge fed him.

When Snake Head-Ornament came home,
he would say to the bull snake, "Father, get
off." And the snake would crawl down the
man's body and into his den again.

Snake Head-Ornament fasted and had a vision.
In the vision his gods, he thought, bade him go to
war. He made up a war party and led it against
enemies on the Yellowstone river. The party not
only killed no enemies, but lost three of their own
men; and they thought Snake Head-Ornament
was to blame for it. "You said your prayers were
strong," they said; "and we have lost three men!
Your gods have not helped us."

Snake Head-Ornament thought his gods were
angry with him; and when he came home he
went about crying and mourning and calling
upon his gods to give him another vision. "Pity me,
gods," he cried, "make me strong that I may
bring home scalps and horses." He was a brave
man, and his bad fortune made his heart sore.
-----File: 071.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

In those days, when a man mourned he cut
off his hair, painted his body with white clay,
and threw away his moccasins. He also cut his
flesh with a knife or some sharp weapon. Now
when a man sought a vision
from the gods, he wept and
mourned, that the gods
might have pity on him; and
for this he went away from
the village, alone, into the
hills. So it happened, that
Snake Head-Ornament, on
his way to the hills, went
mourning and crying past a
field where sat a woman, his
clan cousin, on her watch-*stage.
Seeing him, she began
a song to tease him:

/P
He said, "I am a young bird!"
If a young bird, he should be in his nest;
But he comes here looking gray,
And wanders about outside the village!

He said, "I am a young snake!"
If a young snake, he should be in the hills among the red buttes;
But he comes here looking gray and crying,
And wanders aimlessly about!
P/

When the woman sang, "He comes here looking
gray," she meant that the man was gray
from the white-clay paint on his body.

Snake Head-Ornament heard her song; but,
knowing she was his clan sister, he cried out to
her: "Sing louder, cousin! You are right; let
my 'fathers' hear what you say. I do not know
if they will feel shame or not, but the bull snake
and the bald eagle both called me 'son'!"
-----File: 072.png---------------------------------------------------------

What he meant was that the bull snake and
the bald eagle were his dream gods. That is,
they had appeared to him in a dream, and promised
to help him as they would a son, when he
went to war. In her song, the woman taunted him
with this. If she had not been his clan cousin,
he would have been beside himself with anger.
As it was, he but laughed and did not hurt her.

But the woman had cause for singing her
song. Years before, when Snake Head-Ornament
was a very young man, he went out with a war
party and killed a Sioux woman. When he
came home the people called him brave, and
made much of him; and he grew quite puffed up
now that all looked up to him.

Not long after, he was made a member of the
Black Mouth society. It happened one day,
that the women were building a fence of logs,
set upright around the village, to defend it from
enemies. Snake Head-Ornament, as a member
of the Black Mouths, was one of the men overseeing
the work. This woman, his clan cousin,
was slow at her task; and, to make her move
more briskly, Snake Head-Ornament came close
to her and fired off his gun just past her knees.
She screamed, but seeing it was Snake Head-Ornament
who had shot, and knowing he was
her clan cousin, she did not get angry. Nevertheless,
she did not forget! And, years after,
she had revenge in her taunting song.

<tb>

Young men going out with a war party had
to take much chaffing from older warriors who
-----File: 073.png---------------------------------------------------------
were clan cousins. My brother was once out with
a party of fifty, many of them young men. They
were fleeing from a big camp of Sioux and had
ridden for two days. The second night one of
the younger men, a mere lad, fell asleep as he
rode his pony. An older warrior, his clan cousin,
fired a gun past the lad's ear. "Young man,"
he cried, "you sleep so soundly that only thunder
can waken you!" The rest of the party
thought the warrior's words a huge joke.

[Illustration]
-----File: 074.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




EIGHTH CHAPTER

INDIAN DOGS


In old times we Indian people had no horses,
and not many families of my tribe owned them
when I was a little girl. But I do not think
there ever was a time when we Hidatsas did not
own dogs. We trained them to draw our tent
poles and our loaded travois. We never used
dogs to chase deer, as white men do.

Our Hidatsa dogs--the breed we owned when
I was a little girl--had broad faces, with gentle,
knowing eyes; erect, pointed ears; and tails curling,
never trailing like a wolf's tail. They had
soft silky hair, gray, black, or spotted red or
white. All had stout, heavy legs. I think this
sturdiness was because we saved only dogs of
stout build to drag our travois.

The Teton Sioux, who lived south of us,
owned dogs like ours, but of slenderer build and
-----File: 075.png---------------------------------------------------------
legs. They liked these dogs, I think, because
they were speedier; for the Sioux were hunters,
always moving from place to place.

Almost every family in Like-a-Fishhook village
owned two or more dogs; and, as there were
about seventy lodges in the village, our dogs
made a large pack. The dogs knew every man
and child in the village, and being, besides, well
trained, seldom bit anyone. But they were
quick to wind a stranger. A visitor from another
tribe was sure to be beset by a troop of dogs,
growling and barking at his heels.

The dogs had one habit I liked. Every
evening about bedtime--and bedtime for a little
Indian girl was early--some dog was sure
to start up, <i>wu-wu-wu!</i> And all the others
would join in, even the little puppies. I used
to lie in my bed and listen to them.

About midnight, the barking would start
up again, especially if there was a moon, and
again a little before daylight; but I was usually
asleep at these hours.

[Illustration]

In daytime lookouts
were always on
the roofs of some of
the lodges watching
if enemies or
buffaloes were
about. If they
saw our hunters,
with meat, coming home over the prairie, these
lookouts would cry out, "<i>Hey-da-ey!</i>"[1] And
the dogs, knowing what the cry meant, would

[Footnote 1: H[e=]y dä [e=]y´]
-----File: 076.png---------------------------------------------------------
join in with <i>wu-u-u-u</i>."[1] They liked fresh buffalo
meat no less than the Indians.

But the greatest excitement was when
enemies were seen. The lookouts then cried,
"<i>Ahahuts[2]--they come against us!</i>" Warriors, on
hearing the cry, seized weapons and ran out of
their lodges, yelling shrilly. The chiefs sprang
for their ponies, twisting lariats into the ponies'
mouths for bridles. Medicine men chanted holy
songs, and women ran about calling to their children.
But above all rose the barking of the
dogs, every beast joining in the hubbub.

One day, after the midday meal--I think
I was then eight years old--old Turtle went
down to the river and fetched an armful of dry
willows. They were about four feet long and
as thick as a child's wrist; some were forked at
the top. She set them in a circle, with tops
together like a tepee, at one side of the lodge
entrance near the place where the dogs slept.

"What are you doing, grandmother?" I asked.

Turtle did not answer my question. "I
want to get some dry grass," she said. "Come
and help me."

We went out to a place in the hills where
was some long, dead grass. Turtle pulled a
big armful, piling it on her robe which she spread
on the ground. She drew the corners of the
robe together, slung the bundle over her shoulder
and we came back to the village.

She laid the grass thickly over the sides of
the little tepee, leaning chunks of wood against
it to keep the grass in place. She left a door, or

[Footnote 1: W[u:]-[u:]-[u:]]

[Footnote 2: A hä h[u:]ts´]
-----File: 077.png---------------------------------------------------------
opening, in front; and she even bound a stick over
the door, like the pole over the door of a hunting
lodge. Last, she put grass inside, as if for a bed.

"Grandmother,
what <i>are</i> you doing?"
I begged; but she led
me into the lodge, telling
me nothing.

I was awakened
early the next morning
by dogs barking
on the roof. As I lay
listening, I thought I
heard a faint whining outside. It seemed to come
from the place where the little grass tepee stood.

[Illustration]

I fell asleep, and awoke a second time to
see Red Blossom fanning the fire with a goose
wing. Breakfast was soon ready, of fresh boiled
buffalo meat. The hunters had come in only
the night before, and they had brought a fresh
side-and-ribs for a present to my father.

After the meal I saw Turtle gather up the
scraps of meat into a wooden bowl. "Come,"
she said, leading me out of the lodge.

She stopped before the tepee, and thrust the
bowl of scraps within. Again I heard the faint
whining. I dropped to my knees and looked in.
There I saw our best dog, the pet of us all; and
beside her lay four little puppies.

"<i>Eh, sukkeets!</i>"[1] I cried, "Oh, good!" And I
drew the puppies out one by one, to cuddle them.
The mother dog whined, and raised her eyes to me.
She was a gentle dog and did not snap at my hand.

[Footnote 1: s[)u]k´ k[=e][=e]ts]
-----File: 078.png---------------------------------------------------------

I do not know whether I or the puppies'
mother cuddled them more, the next few days.
One puppy I came to love dearly. He was a
wriggling little thing, with a bob tail for all the
world like a rabbit's, except
that it hung down. There
were ten or more bobtailed
dogs in the village all of them
born so. My puppy was
black, so I named him
<i>Sheepeesha</i>,[1] or Blackie.

[Illustration]

It must have been a
funny sight to see me take
my puppy out for a walk.
Stooping, I would lay the
puppy between my shoulders
and draw my tiny robe
up over his back; and I
would walk off proud as any Indian mother of her
new babe. The old mother dog would creep half
out of her kennel, following me with her gentle
eyes. I was careful not to go out of her sight.

When the puppies were ten days old my
grandmother brought in some fresh sage, the
kind we Indians use in a sweat lodge. She laid
the sage by the fireplace and fetched in the puppies,
barring the door so that the mother dog
could not come in. I could hear the poor dog
whining pitifully.

"What are you going to do, grandmother?"
I asked.

"I am going to smoke the puppies."

"Why, grandmother?" I cried.

[Footnote 1: Sh[=e][=e]´ p[=e][=e] shä]
-----File: 079.png---------------------------------------------------------

"Because the puppies are old enough to eat
cooked meat, for their teeth have come through.
The sage is a sacred plant,[** .] Its smoke will make
the puppies hungry, so that they will eat."

While she was speaking, she opened my little
pet's jaws. Sure enough, four white teeth were
coming through the gums.

Turtle raked some coals from the ashes, and
laid on them a handful of the sage. A column of
thick white smoke arose upward to the smoke hole.

My grandmother took my puppy in her hands
and held his head in the smoke. The poor puppy
struggled and choked. Thick spittle, like suds,
came out of his mouth. I was frightened, and
thought he was going to die.

"The smoke will make the puppy healthy,"
said Turtle. "Now let us see if he will grow up
strong, to carry my little granddaughter's tent."

She lifted the puppy, still choking, from the
floor, and let him fall so that he landed on his
feet. The puppy was still young and weak, and
he was strangling; but his little legs stiffened,
and he stood without falling.

"Hey, hey," laughed my grandmother. "This
is a strong dog! He will grow up to carry your
tent." For in old times, when traveling, we
Hidatsas made our dogs drag our tents on poles,
like travois.

Turtle tried the other three puppies. One, not
as strong as the rest, fell on his side. "This dog
will not grow up strong," said my grandmother.
"I will give him to my neighbor, who asks for one."
-----File: 080.png---------------------------------------------------------

She now lifted a clay pot out of the ashes,
and from it poured something into a flat bowl;
corn mush, I think it was, boiled with buffalo
fats. She set the bowl before the puppies. They
quickly lapped up the mush, with funny red
tongues. My little
black puppy even
gulped down a lump
of fat.

[Illustration]

Turtle laughed. "I
told you your puppy
is strong," she cried.
"He will soon grow up
to carry your tent. But
to grow, our puppies must be fed. It will be
your work to feed them. See they do not starve."

But, if I had to feed the puppies, my grandmother
also helped. Indeed, the whole family
watched to see that they had enough. If fresh
meat was brought in, we always boiled some and
gave to the puppies. We did not give them raw
meat. "It is not good for puppies. It will make
them sick," said Turtle.

But, as the puppies grew up, we began to
feed them raw meat. My grandmother sometimes
boiled corn for them, into a coarse mush.
They were fond of this. As they grew older,
any food that turned sour or was unfit for the
family to eat was given me for my doggies. They
ate it greedily. It did not seem to harm them.

Sometimes a deer or elk was killed, that was
poor in flesh. Such a carcass was cut up and
given to the dogs of the village, and of course
mine got their share.
-----File: 081.png---------------------------------------------------------

When several buffaloes were killed, the hunters
often could not carry all the meat home,
and took only the best cuts. The next day
any one who wanted, could go out and take
the cast-away pieces for her dogs. Then, there
were parts that we always threw away or gave
to the dogs. The tough, outside meat of a
buffalo's hams we cut off and saved for the dogs.
The inside meat, next the bone, we thought
our very best. Hunters were fond of roasting
it before the fire, on two stones.

Even in famine times we did not forget our
dogs; but we sometimes had only soft bones to
give them that had been broken for boiling.
The dogs gnawed these, and so got a little food.

We Hidatsas loved our good dogs, and were
kind to them.

[Illustration]
-----File: 082.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




NINTH CHAPTER

TRAINING A DOG


Autumn twice came around, and my puppy
had grown into a romping dog. In the moon
of Yellow Leaves, my tribe went again into
winter camp. We returned to Like-a-Fishhook
village rather early in the spring. Patches of
snow lay on the ground, and the ice was still
firm on the Missouri when we crossed. We
reached the village in midafternoon.

My father had two pack horses loaded with
our stuff and our dogs dragged well-laden travois.
While my mothers were unpacking, my father
made a fire. He drew his flint and steel, and
with a bit of soft, rotten wood for tinder struck
a spark. In olden times the Hidatsas made
fire with two sticks. "I saw very old men make
fire thus, when I was a lad," my grandfather
once told me. I never saw it done myself.
-----File: 083.png---------------------------------------------------------

Small Ankle wrapped the spark, caught in
the tinder, in a little bunch of dry grass, and
waved it in the air until the grass was ablaze.
He had raked together some bits of charcoal
in the fireplace and on them laid a few dry-*wood
splinters. To these he held the burning
grass and soon had a fire.

There was a little firewood in the lodge,
left from the previous autumn, but not enough
to keep the fire going long. As my mothers
were still unpacking, my father offered to go
out and get wood for the night. Getting wood,
we thought, was woman's work; but my father
was a kind man, willing to help his wives.

From the saddle of one of his horses Small
Ankle took a rawhide lariat, and to one end
fastened a short stick. There were some cottonwoods
under the river bank, not far from the
village. Into one of the largest trees Small
Ankle threw his lariat until the stick caught in
some dead branches overhead. A sharp pull
broke off the branches. My father gathered
them up and bore them to the lodge.

There were logs and dead wood lying along
the river, but they were wet with the snows.
My father knew the dead branches in the trees
would be dried by the winds. He wanted dry
wood to kindle a quick fire.

The next morning after we had eaten, Red
Blossom took her ax, and, dragging a travois
from its place against the fire screen, led the
way out of the lodge. Strikes-Many Woman
followed her. Our biggest dog, lying outside,
-----File: 084.png---------------------------------------------------------
saw them coming. He got up, shaking himself,
wagging his tail, and barking <i>wu-wu-wu!</i> Our
dogs were always ready to be harnessed. They
liked to go to the woods, knowing they would
be fed well afterwards.

This, our best dog, was named <i>Akeekahee</i>,[1] or
Took-from-Him. He belonged to Red Blossom.
A woman owning a dog would ask some brave
man of her family to name him for her; and
Red Blossom had asked my grandfather, Big
Cloud, to name her dog. Once an enemy had
stolen his horse, but Big Cloud gave chase and
retook his horse from that bad enemy. For this,
he named the dog Took-from-Him.

My mothers harnessed their dogs, four in number
and started off. They returned a little after
midday; first, Red Blossom,
with a great pack of wood on
her back; after her,
Strikes-Many Woman;
then the four dogs, marching one behind the
other, Took-from-Him in the lead. Each dog
dragged a travois loaded with wood.

[Illustration]

[Footnote 1: À[**P1 can't tell if there is a dot over the A][**P2: Ä ?] k[=e][=e]´ kä h[=e][=e]]
-----File: 085.png---------------------------------------------------------

My mothers dropped their loads before the
lodge entrance. The dogs were unhitched; and,
while old Turtle fed them, Strikes-Many Woman
carried the wood into the lodge and piled it
by the corral, where it was handy to the fire.

I was eager to have my dog broken to harness
and begged my grandmother to make a travois
for him. "I will," she said, "but wait another
moon. Your dog will then be fed fat, after the
long winter. A dog should be two years old,
and strong, when he is broken. To work a dog too
young or when he is weak will hurt his back."

A month after this, my mothers came home
one afternoon from woodgathering, dragging
each a cottonwood pole about eight feet long.
They peeled these poles bare of bark, and laid
them up on the corn stage to dry.

"What are the poles for?" I asked.

"They are for your travois," said my grandmother.
"Your dog <i>Sheepeesha</i> is now old enough
to work; and my little granddaughter, too, must
learn to be useful."

I was ready to cry out and dance, when I
heard these words of my grandmother; and I
thought I could never, never wait until those
poles dried. The heavy ladder we used for
mounting the stage lay on the ground when not
in use. I was too little to lift it, to climb up to
the poles; but I went every day to stand below
and gaze at them longingly.

One afternoon my grandmother fetched the
poles into the lodge. "They are dry now," she
said. "I will make the travois frame."
-----File: 086.png---------------------------------------------------------

With her big knife she hacked the greater
ends of the poles flat, so that they would run
smooth on the ground. The small ends she
crossed for the joint, cutting a notch in each to
make them fit. She bound the joint with strips
of the big tendon in a buffalo's neck that we
Indians call the <i>eetsuta</i>[1]. These strips drew
taut as they dried, making the joint firm.

Turtle now drew a saddle, or cushion, over
the poles just under the joint, sewing it down
with buckskin thongs. This saddle was to keep the
dog from fretting his shoulders against the poles.

The hoop for the basket was of ash. My
father webbed it. He cut a long, thin thong
from the edges of a hide, and soaked it to make
it soft. Taking some wet paint in his palm, he
drew the thong through it, thus painting it a
bright red. He laced the thong over the hoop
and my grandmother bound the basket in place.

[Illustration]

The harness was of two pieces: a collar, to go
around the dog's neck;and a breast thong, that was
drawn across his chest and through a loop in the
saddle, was lapped once or twice around one of the
travois poles, and was finally carried under the
dog's body to the other pole, where it was made fast.

I could hardly wait to eat my breakfast the
next morning, for my mothers had promised to

[Footnote 1: [=e][=e]t su´ tä[** [u:]?]]
-----File: 087.png---------------------------------------------------------
take me with them to gather wood. "And we
are going to begin training your dog to-day,"
they told me.

I knew a dog should be fed before he was
harnessed, and I saved half my breakfast meat
to give to mine. Owning a dog, and invited to go
with my mothers to get wood, I felt that in spite
of my girlish years I was almost a woman now.

Breakfast ended, Red Blossom fetched the
new travois and laid it on my dog's back. He
looked up, puzzled, then sank to the ground and
lay wagging his tail from side to side, sweeping
a clean place in the dust. Red Blossom bound
the collar about his neck, and drew and fastened
the breast thong. While she was doing this I
gently patted my dog's head.

"<i>Nah!</i>" said Red Bloosom[** Blossom], "Come!" But
my doggie was a bit frightened. He twisted
about, trying to rid himself of the travois, but
only hurt himself. He looked up at me and
whined. Red Blossom tied a thong to his collar
and put the end in my hand. "Lead him,"
she said. "He will follow the other dogs." She
led off, Strikes-Many Woman behind her, and
the dogs followed after, in a line.

I tugged at my dog's thong, pursing my lips
and making a whistling sound, as Indians do.
My doggie understood. He rose to his feet, and,
seeing the other dogs moving off, followed after
the last one.

We thus came to the woods, about a mile and
a half from the village. The dogs sank in their
tracks, to rest. My mothers searched about for
-----File: 088.png---------------------------------------------------------
dead-and-dry wood, which they cut into lengths
of two feet or more, and piled them in the path
near the dogs.

When they had enough wood cut, my mothers
lifted each travois by its basket, and turned it
so that the dog's nose was pointed toward the
village; and they loaded each travois with a
double armful of wood, bound to the basket with
two thongs. My two mothers then lifted each a
load to her own back, and started to the village.

I did not carry any load myself, as my shoulders
were not strong enough for such heavy work;
but I led my dog. Not a very big load was put
on him, as it was his first. I called to him, tugging
gently at the thong. Seeing the other dogs
ahead, he followed willingly.

Old Turtle awaited us at the door. "Grandmother,"
I cried joyfully, "my dog has brought
home a load of wood. He did not try to run
away." Turtle laughed, and helped me unload.

That evening I was sitting by the fire with
my good dog, for Red Blossom had let me bring
him into the lodge. Now and then I slipped
him a bit of meat I had saved from my supper.
My father had laid some dry sticks on the fire,
and the blaze flickered and rose, flickered and rose,
making post and rafter yellow with its light.
Small Ankle sat on his couch smoking his pipe.
Suddenly I heard the clitter of the hollow hoofs
as the lodge door was raised and let fall again.
I looked up. Coyote Eyes, a Ree Indian, was
coming around the screen.
-----File: 089.png---------------------------------------------------------

"<i>Hau!</i>"[1] cried my father, making a place
for him on the couch. Small Ankle was a
polite man. He handed his pipe to the Ree,
who took big pulls, blowing the smoke through
his nostrils.

Coyote Eyes gave the pipe back to my father.
"That is a fine dog you have," he said to me.
"I know a story of my tribe about two dogs."

Being but a little girl, I did not think it
proper for me to talk to a stranger, but my father
answered for me, "What is the story?"

"In the beginning, my tribe came out of a
cave in the earth," said Coyote Eyes. "They
journeyed until they came to the Missouri river.
'Let us go up this river,' they said, 'and find a
place to build our villages.' They were weary
of journeying.

"They had two dogs in the camp. One was
black; his name was Death. The other was
white, and her name
was Sickness. These
dogs were asleep
when the tribe broke
camp the next morning.
The people were
in such haste to be
off that they forgot
to waken the dogs.

[Illustration]

"The third day after, they saw two great fires
sweeping toward them over the prairie. The
women cried out with fear. All thought that
they should die.

[Footnote 1: Hau (How)]
-----File: 090.png---------------------------------------------------------

"When the fires came near, the people saw
that they were the two dogs, Death and Sickness.

"'Do not fear,' said the dogs. 'Our hearts
are not all evil. True, we will bite you, because
you forgot us; but we will also live with you
and be your friends. We will carry your burdens;
and when we die, you shall eat us.'

"The dogs grew old. The white one died,
and her skin became the squash. Now our
squashes are of different colors, white, gray,
yellow, spotted, just as are dogs. These squashes
we eat. Also we Rees eat dog meat; for,
before he died, the black dog said, 'You shall
eat my flesh.'

"And to this day, when our Ree people sicken
and die, they say, 'We are bitten by Sickness and
Death.'"

My father smiled. "We Hidatsas do not
eat dogs," he said; and then to me, "Little
daughter, it is bedtime."

I did not always obey my mothers; for, like
all little girls, I was naughty sometimes, but I
dared not disobey my father.

I put my dog out of the lodge, and went to
bed.
-----File: 091.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




TENTH CHAPTER

LEARNING TO WORK


My mothers began to teach me household
tasks when I was about twelve years old. "You
are getting to be a big girl," they said. "Soon
you will be a woman, and marry. Unless you
learn to work, how will you feed your family?"

One of the things given me to do was fetching
water from the river. No spring was near
our village; and, anyhow, our prairie springs
are often bitter with alkali. But the Missouri
river, fed by melting snows of the Montana
mountains, gave us plenty of fresh water. Missouri
river water is muddy; but it soon settles, and is
cool and sweet to drink. We Indians love our
big river, and we are glad to drink of its waters,
as drank our fathers.

A steep path led down the bank to the watering
place. Down this path, the village girls
-----File: 092.png---------------------------------------------------------
made their way every morning to get water for
drinking and cooking. They went in little
groups or in pairs. Two girls, cousins or chums,
sometimes swung a freshly filled pail from a
pole on their shoulders.

But there were few pails of metal in my tribe,
when I was a little girl. I used to fetch water
in a clay pot, sometimes in a buffalo-paunch
lining skewered on a stick; but my commonest
bucket was of a buffalo heart skin. When my
father killed a buffalo, he took out the heart
skin, and filled it with grass until it dried. This
he gave to Red Blossom, who
sewed a little stick on each
side of the mouth; and bound
a short stick and sinews between
them for handle. Such
a bucket held about three
pints. It was a frail looking
vessel, but lasted a long time.

[Illustration]

We girls liked to go to the
watering place; for, while we were
filling our buckets, we could gossip
with our friends. For older girls
and young men it was a place for
courtship. A youth, with painted
face and trailing hair switch,
would loiter near the path, and smile slyly at his
sweetheart as she passed. She did not always
smile back. Sometimes for long weeks, she held
her eyes away, not even glancing at his moccasins.
It was a shy smile that she gave him, at last. Nor
did she talk with her love-boy--as we called
-----File: 093.png---------------------------------------------------------
him--when others were about. We should have
thought that silly. But he might wait for her
at sunset, by her father's lodge, and talk with
her in the twilight.

But I had other tasks besides fetching water.
I learned to cook, sweep, and sew with awl and
sinew. Red Blossom taught me to embroider
with quills of gull and porcupine, dyed in colors.
Sometimes I helped at harder work; gathered
drift wood at the river, dressed or scraped hides,
and even helped in our cornfield.

I liked to go with my mothers to the cornfields
in planting time, when the spring sun was
shining and the birds singing in the tree tops.
How good it seemed to be out under the open
sky, after the long months in our winter camp!
A cottonwood tree stood at a turn of the road to
our field. Every season a pair of magpies built
their nest in it. They were saucy birds and
scolded us roundly when we passed. How I used
to laugh at their wicked scoldings!

I am afraid I did not help my mothers much.
Like any young girl, I liked better to watch the
birds than to work. Sometimes I chased away
the crows. Our corn indeed had many enemies,
and we had to watch that they did not get our
crop. Magpies and crows destroyed much of the
young corn. Crows were fond of pulling up the
plants when they were a half inch or an inch
high. Spotted gophers dug up the roots of the
young corn, to nibble the soft seed.

When our field was all planted, Red Blossom
used to go back and replant any hills that the
-----File: 094.png---------------------------------------------------------
birds had destroyed. Where she found a plant
missing, she dug a little hole with her hand and
dropped in a seed, or I dropped it in for her.

It was hard work, stooping to plant in the
hot sun, and Red Blossom never liked having to
go over the field a second time. "Those bad
crows," she would groan, "they make us much
trouble."

My grandmother Turtle made scarecrows to
frighten away the birds. In
the middle of the field she
drove two sticks for legs,
and bound two other sticks
to them for arms; on the
top, she fastened a ball of
cast-away skins for a head.
She belted an old robe about
the figure to make it look
like a man. Such a scarecrow
looked wicked! Indeed
I was almost afraid of it
myself. But the bad
crows, seeing the scarecrow
never moved from its place,
soon lost their fear, and came back.

[Illustration]

In the months of midsummer, the crows did
not give us much trouble; but, as the moon of
Cherries drew near, they became worse than ever.
The corn had now begun to ear, and crows and
blackbirds came in flocks to peck open the green
ears for the soft kernels. Many families now
built stages in their fields, where the girls and
young women of the household came to sit and
-----File: 095.png---------------------------------------------------------
sing as they watched that crows and other thieves
did not steal the ripening grain.

We cared for our corn in those days, as we
would care for a child; for we Indian people loved
our fields as mothers love their children. We
thought that the corn plants had souls, as children
have souls, and that the growing corn liked
to hear us sing, as children like to hear their
mothers sing to them. Nor did we want the
birds to come and steal our corn, after the hard
work of planting and hoeing. Horses, too, might
break into the field, or boys might steal the green
ears and go off and roast them.

A watchers' stage was not hard to build.
Four posts, forked at the tops, upheld beams,
on which was laid a floor of puncheons, or split
small logs, at the height of the full grown corn.
The floor was about four feet long by three wide,
roomy enough for two girls to sit together comfortably.
Often a soft robe was spread on the
floor. A ladder made of the trunk of a tree rested
against the stage. The ladder had three steps.

A tree was often left standing in the field, to
shade the watchers' stage. If the tree was small
and more shade was wanted, a robe was stretched
over three poles leaned against the stage. These
poles could be shifted with the sun.

Girls began to go on the watchers' stage
when about ten or twelve years of age, and many
kept up the custom after they were grown up
and married. Older women, working in the
field and stopping to rest, often went on the
stage and sang.
-----File: 096.png---------------------------------------------------------

There was a watchers' stage in my mothers'
field, where my sister, Cold Medicine, and I
sat and sang; and in the two weeks of the ripening
season we were
singing most of the
time. We looked upon
watching our field
as a kind of lark. We
liked to sing, and now
and then between
songs we stood up to
see if horses had
broken into the field
or if any boys were
about. Boys of nine
or ten years of age
were quite troublesome.
They liked
to steal the green
ears to roast by a fire in the woods.

[Illustration]

I think Cold Medicine and I were rather
glad to catch a boy stealing our corn, especially
if he was a clan cousin, for then we could call
him all the bad names we wished. "You bad,
bad boy," we would cry. "You thief,--stealing
from your own relatives! <i>Nah, nah</i>,--go
away." This was enough; no boy stayed after
such a scolding.

Most of the songs we sang were love-boy
songs, as we called them; but not all were. One
that we younger girls were fond of singing--girls,
-----File: 097.png---------------------------------------------------------
that is, of about twelve years of age--was like
this:

/*
You bad boys, you are all alike!
Your bow is like a bent basket hoop;
Your arrows are fit only to shoot into the air;
You poor boys, you must run on the prairie barefoot, because you have no moccasins!
*/

This song we sang to tease the boys who came
to hunt birds in the near-by woods. Small
boys went bird hunting nearly every day. The
birds that a boy snared or shot he gave to his
grandparents to roast in the lodge fire; for,
with their well-worn teeth, old people could no
longer chew our hard, dried buffalo meat.

Here is another song; but, that you may
understand it, I will explain to you what <i>eekupa</i>[1]
means. A girl loved by another girl as her own
sister was called her <i>eekupa</i>. I think your
word "chum," as you explain it, has nearly the
same meaning. This is the song:

/*
"My <i>eekupa</i>, what do you wish to see?" you said to me.
What I wish to see is the corn silk peeping out of the growing ear;
But what <i>you</i> wish to see is that naughty young man coming!
*/

Here is a song that older girls sang to tease
young men of the Dog Society who happened
to be going by:

/*
You young man of the Dog Society, you said to me,
"When I go east with a war party, you will hear news of me how brave I am!"
I have heard news of you;
When the fight was on, you ran and hid;
And you still think you are a brave young man!
Behold, you have joined the Dog Society;
But I call you just plain <i>dog</i>!
*/

Songs that we sang on the watchers' stage
we called <i>meedaheeka</i>,[2] or gardeners' songs. I
have said that many of them were love-boy

[Footnote 1: [=e][=e]´ k[u:] pä]

[Footnote 2: m[=e][=e] dä´ h[=e][=e] kä]
-----File: 098.png---------------------------------------------------------
songs, and were intended to tease. We called
a girl's sweetheart her love-boy. All girls, we
know, like to tease their sweethearts.

[Illustration]

At one side of our field Turtle had made a
booth, diamond willows thrust in the ground in
a circle, with leafy
tops bent over
and tied together.
In this booth, my
sister and I, with
our mothers and
old Turtle, cooked
our meals. We
started a fire in
the booth as soon
as we got to the
field, and ate our
breakfast often at
sunrise. Our food
we had brought
with us, usually buffalo meat, fresh or dried. Fresh
meat we laid on the coals to broil. Dried meat we
thrust on a stick and held over the fire to toast.

Sometimes we brought a clay cooking pot,
and boiled squashes. We were fond of squashes
and ate many of them. We sometimes boiled
green corn and beans. My sister and I shelled
the corn from the cob. We shelled the beans
or boiled them in the pod. My grandmother
poured the mess in a wooden bowl, and we ate
with spoons which she made from squash stems.
She would split a stem with her knife and put
in a little stick to hold the split open.
-----File: 099.png---------------------------------------------------------

I do not think anything can taste sweeter
than a mess of fresh corn and beans, in the cool
morning air, when the birds are twittering and
the sun is just peeping over the tree tops.

[Illustration]
-----File: 100.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




ELEVENTH CHAPTER

PICKING JUNE BERRIES


June berry time had come. I was now fourteen
years, old and had begun to think myself
almost a young woman. Some of the young
men even smiled at me as I came up from the
watering place. I never smiled back, for I
thought: "My father is a chief, and I belong
to one of the best families in my tribe. I will
be careful whom I choose to be my friends."

A little north of my father's, stood the earth
lodge of Bear Man's family. Bear Man was
an eagle hunter. He had magic snares of sacred
hemp plant which he tossed into the air as he
prayed to the eagle spirits. After doing so he
was sure to catch many young golden eagles
at his eagle pit. We thought him a great medicine
man.

Bear Man had a son named Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing,
a straight-limbed, rather good-*
-----File: 101.png---------------------------------------------------------
*looking lad, a year older than myself. Bear
Man's father died, and Bear Man cut off his
long hair in mourning. Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing
made a switch of his father's hair, tastefully
spotting it with little lumps of spruce gum
mixed with red ochre. He looked quite manly,
I thought, wearing this switch, in spite of his
fifteen years.

[Illustration]

My father's earth lodge and Bear Man's
both faced eastward, with the lodge of Blue
Paint's family standing
between; but, as
I stood at my father's
lodge entrance, I
could see the flat top
of Bear Man's lodge
over Blue Paint's
roof. Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing
had
joined the Stone
Hammer Society a
short while before,
and had begun to
paint his face like a
young man. He
would get up on his
father's roof, painted, and decked out in hair
switch, best leggings, and moccasins, and sing his
society's songs. He had a fine voice, I thought;
and when I went out with my buck-brush
broom to sweep the ground about our lodge
entrance, Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing would sing
harder than ever. I thought perhaps he did
-----File: 102.png---------------------------------------------------------
this so that I would hear him. I was too well-bred
to look up at him, but I did not always
hurry to finish my sweeping.

There had been plenty of rain, and the June
berry trees were now loaded with ripe fruit.
We Indians set great store by these berries,
and almost every family dried one or more sackfuls
for winter. June berries are sweet, and,
as we had no sugar, we were fond of them.

We were sitting one evening at our supper.
Red Blossom had gone into the woods earlier
in the day and fetched home some ripe June
berries which we were eating. Perhaps that
is why we ended our meal with our kettle half-full
of boiled meat. "We will save this meat
until morning," Red Blossom said. "We must
breakfast early, for Strikes-Many Woman and
I are going with a party to pick June berries.
Our daughter may go with us, if she will."

I was quite happy when I heard this. I
had seen my two mothers getting ready their
berry sacks; and, looking over to the bench where
they lay, I now saw that a small sack had been
laid out for me.

Red Blossom dipped her fingers into the
kettle for a lump of fat and continued: "The
mother of that young man, Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing,
said to me to-day, 'If your daughter goes
berrying to-morrow, my son wishes to go with
her. He will take his bow and keep off enemies."

I did not blush, for we Indian girls had dark
skins and painted our cheeks; but I felt my heart
jump. I looked down at the floor, then got
-----File: 103.png---------------------------------------------------------
up and went about my work, humming a song
as I did so; for I thought, "I am going berrying
in the morning." I felt quite grown-up to
know that a young man wanted to go berrying
with me.

We were off the next morning before the sun
was up. I walked with my mothers and the
other women. The men went a little ahead,
armed, some with guns, others with bows.
Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing walked behind the men.
On his back I saw a handsome
otter-skin quiver, full of arrows. I
felt safer to see those arrows. Enemies
might be lurking anywhere
in the woods, ready to capture us
or take our scalps. We Indian
women dared not go far into the
woods without men to protect us.

[Illustration]

At the woods the men joined
us, and our party broke up
into little groups, the older men
helping their wives, and the younger men their
sweethearts. I made my way to a clump of
June berry trees bent nearly to the ground with
fruit. I did not look to see if Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing
was following me. I thought, "If he
wants to help me, he may; but I shall not ask
him." I spread a skin under the branches,
and I was looking for a stout stick when I saw
my boy friend breaking off the laden branches
and piling them on the skin, ready to be beaten.

I sat on the ground and with my stick beat
off the berries. Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing fetched
-----File: 104.png---------------------------------------------------------
me fresh branches, and in an hour or two I
had enough berries to fill my sack. Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing's
arrows lay at my feet. Once,
when a near-by bush stirred, my boy friend
leaped for his bow and laid an arrow on the
string; but it was the wind, I guess.

All the time that we worked together Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing
and I spoke not a word. Older
couples, I knew, talked
together, when they
thought of marrying; but
I was a young girl yet and
did not want to be bothered
with a husband.

[Illustration]

When my sack was
filled, I tied it shut and
slung it on my back by
my packing strap. Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing
laid some
sweet smelling leaves under
the sack that the juices
from the ripe berries might
not ooze through and stain my dress.

I am sorry to say that I am not sure I even
thanked Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing for all he did
to help me.

I walked back to the village with the women
as I had come. Ahead of us walked a young
woman named Pink Blossom, with her chin in
the air as if she were angry. The older women,
coming after her, were laughing and slyly jesting
with one another. I asked my mothers
what it was all about.
-----File: 105.png---------------------------------------------------------

It seems there was an old man in our party
named Old Bear, whose wife had died. He
wanted to marry again and smiled at Pink Blossom
whenever she passed him; but she did not
like Old Bear, and she turned her eyes away
whenever he came near.

When she came to the June berry woods,
Pink Blossom set her sack under a tree, while
she picked berries. Old Bear saw the sack.
He folded his robe under his arm into a kind of
pocket, picked it full of berries, and emptied
them into Pink Blossom's sack.

This vexed Pink Blossom. She went to her
sack and poured Old Bear's berries out on the
ground. "I do not want that old man to smile
at me," she told the other women.

It was because the women were laughing at
her and Old Bear, that Pink Blossom walked
ahead with her chin in the air. The others
were having a good deal of fun with one another
at her expense.

"I think Pink Blossom did wrong to waste
the berries," said one, a clan cousin. "If she
did not want them herself, she should have
given them back to Old Bear, for him to eat."

"Old Bear's is a sad case," said Elk Woman.
"But I knew a man in a worse case."

"Tell us of it," said Red Blossom.

"Years ago," said Elk Woman, "I went
berrying with some others on the other side of
the Missouri. In the party was a young man
named Weasel Arm. He was a good singer, and
he liked to sing so that his sweetheart could
-----File: 106.png---------------------------------------------------------
hear his voice. His sweetheart was also in the
party. Weasel Arm helped her fill her sack;
and when she went back with the other women
and they were waiting for some that had not
yet come in, Weasel Arm lay down on the grass
a little way off and sang, beating time on the
stock of his gun.

"As he lay there he heard some one riding
toward him, but thought it was one of his
party. It was a Sioux; and right in the midst
of the song--<i>poh!</i>--the Sioux fired, wounding
Weasel Arm in the hip. Luckily the wound
was slight, and Weasel Arm sprang for the
near-by woods. The Sioux dared not follow
him, for he saw that Weasel Arm had a gun."

"I do not think Weasel Arm's case as sad
as Old Bear's," said one of the women. "Weasel
Arm was wounded in his body, but Old Bear
is wounded in his heart."

Elk Woman laughed. "Have no fear for
Old Bear," she said. "He is an old man and
has had more than one sweetheart. His heart
will soon heal."

[Illustration]

"But I am sorry for
the spilled berries," she
continued. "Pink Blossom
-----File: 107.png---------------------------------------------------------
should not waste good berries, even if Old Bear
does look like an old man."

All laughed at this but Pink Blossom.

"I knew a young woman who once wasted
good rose berries, just as Pink Blossom wasted
the June berries," said Old-Owl Woman.

"Tell us the story," said one of my mothers.

"When I was a girl," said Old-Owl Woman,
"Ear-Eat, a Crow Indian, married Yellow Blossom,
a Hidatsa girl. They went to live with the
Crows, but after a year they came back to visit
our tribe at Five Villages.

"It was in the fall, when the rose berries are
ripe. Now the Crow Indians like to eat rose
berries, and gather them to dry for winter as
we dry squashes. We Hidatsas eat rose berries
sometimes, but we never dry them for winter.
We think they are food for wild men.

"Ear-Eat was riding in the woods near our
villages, when he found a thicket of rose bushes
bending over with their load of ripe berries.
'<i>Ey</i>,' he cried, 'how many berries are here! I
never saw it thus in our Crow country.' And
he got off his horse and began to pick the berries.

"He had no basket to put them in, so he
drew off his leggings, tied the bottoms shut
with his moccasin strings, and, when he had
filled the leggings with berries, he slung them
over his horse's back like a pair of saddle bags.

"He rode home happy, for he thought,
'My wife will be glad to see so many berries.'

"When Yellow Blossom saw her husband
riding home without his leggings, and with the
-----File: 108.png---------------------------------------------------------
tops of his moccasins loose and flapping, she
could hardly believe her eyes. As she stood
staring, Ear-Eat got off his horse and handed
her his bulging leggings. 'Here, wife,' he cried,
'look at these fine berries. Now we shall have
something good to eat.'

"The village women, hearing what Ear-Eat
said, crowded close to look. When they saw
that his leggings were filled with rose berries,
they cried out with laughter.

"Yellow Blossom was angry. 'You are
crazy,' she cried to her husband. 'We Hidatsas
raise corn, beans, sunflower seed, and good
squashes to eat. We are not starving, that we
must eat rose berries.'

"'The Crow Indians eat rose berries,' said
Ear-Eat. 'My mother used to dry them for
winter food.'

"His words but vexed Yellow Blossom more.

"'I am a Hidatsa woman, not a Crow,' she
cried. 'We Hidatsas are not wild people. We
live in earth lodges and eat foods from our gardens.
When we go berrying we put our berries
into clean baskets, not into our leggings.' And
she turned the leggings up and poured the rose
berries out on the ground."

We all laughed at Old-Owl Woman's story.

"We had other use for rose berries when I
was a girl," said Red Blossom. "If a young
man went at evening to talk with his sweetheart,
he put a ripe rose berry in his mouth to
make his breath sweet."
-----File: 109.png---------------------------------------------------------

"I wonder if Old Bear put a rose berry in
his mouth," said Old-Owl Woman.

"I think he put two rose berries in his
mouth," said Red Blossom, smiling.

All laughed again but Pink Blossom; she
walked on, saying nothing.

[Illustration]
-----File: 110.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




TWELFTH CHAPTER

THE CORN HUSKING


After the June berry season came choke-*cherries.
We did not gather so big a store of
these, but they were harder to prepare for drying.
I can yet see old Turtle, with her gnarled,
wrinkled fingers, plying the crushing stones.
She dropped three or four cherries on a round
stone and crushed them with a smaller stone
held in her palm. The pulp she squeezed
through her palms into lumps, which she dried
in the sun.

And then came the corn harvest, busiest
and happiest time of all the year. It was hard
work gathering and husking the corn, but what
fun we had! For days we girls thought of
nothing but the fine dresses we should wear at
the husking.

While the ears were ripening my sister and
I went every morning to sit on our watch stage
-----File: 111.png---------------------------------------------------------
and sing to the corn. One evening we brought
home with us a basketful of the green ears and
were husking them by the fire. My father
gathered up the husks and took them out of
the lodge. I wondered why he did so.

"I fed the husks, daughter, to my pack
horses," he said, when he came back. "To-morrow
I go hunting to get meat for the husking."
He had brought his hunting pony into the lodge,
but he had penned his pack horses for the night
under the corn stage.

My two mothers, I knew, were planning a
big feast. "We have much corn to husk," they
said, "and we must have plenty of food, for we
do not want our huskers to go away hungry."

Small Ankle left us before daybreak. He
returned the fourth day after, about noon, with
two deer loaded on his pack horses. "One is
a black-tail," he told us when he came in the
lodge, "a buck that I killed yesterday in
some bad lands by the Little Missouri. He
was hiding in a clump of trees. As I rode near,
he winded me and ran out into the open. I
checked my pony, and the buck stopped to
look around. I fired, and he fell; but, when I
got off my horse, the buck rose and tried to push
me with his horns. I killed him with my knife."
A wounded black-tail often tried to fight off
the hunters: a white-tail hardly ever did so.

The next morning we women rose early,
and with our baskets hastened to the cornfield.
All day we plucked the ripe ears, bearing them
in our baskets to the center of the field, where
-----File: 112.png---------------------------------------------------------
we laid them in a long pile. That night my
father and Red Blossom slept on the watchers'
stage, to see that no horse broke in and trampled
our corn pile. There was not much danger of
this. Around the field ran a kind of fence, of
willows, enough to keep out the ponies.

The rest of us returned to the lodge to make
ready for the feast the next day. Turtle fetched
out three great bundles of
dried buffalo meat and piled
them on the puncheon
bench with the
freshly killed deer
meat. Our three kettles
were scoured and
set by, ready to be
taken to the field.

[Illustration]

At nightfall Bear's
Tail went around the
village to lodges of
our relatives and
friends, and invited
the young men to
come to our husking.

I was too excited that night to sleep much.
Early in the morning my sister and I rose and
went to the river for a dip in its cold waters.
After a hasty breakfast I put on my best dress,
of deer skin, with hoofs hanging like bangles at
the edge of the skirt and three rows of costly
elk teeth across the front. Cold Medicine helped
me paint my face, and was careful to rub a little
red ochre in the part of my hair.
-----File: 113.png---------------------------------------------------------

The sun was just coming over the prairie
when we started for the field. We had loaded
our kettles and meat on two pack horses, and
old Turtle led the way. My father and Red
Blossom had risen early and eaten breakfast,
and now had a brisk fire going. We put our
kettles on, after filling them with water. In
one we put dried, in another fresh, meat; the
third kettle we filled with green corn, late
planted for this purpose. The meat and corn
were for our feast.

The sun was three hours high when the
huskers came. They were about thirty in all,
young men, except three or four crippled old
warriors who wanted to feast. These were too old
to work much, but my father made them welcome.

The huskers came into the field yelling and
singing. We had, indeed, heard their yells
long before we saw them. I think young men
all sing and yell, just because they are young.

My sister and I were already seated at one
side of the corn pile, and the other women
joined us. The young men sat down on the
opposite side, and the husking began.

I saw that Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing sat just
opposite me. Next to him was a young man
named Red Hand, with grass plumes in his
hair. These meant that he had been in a war
party and had been sent out to spy on the
enemy. I saw Red Hand looking at me, and
I was glad that I was wearing my elk teeth dress.
"He is a young man," I thought, "not a boy,
like Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing."
-----File: 114.png---------------------------------------------------------

The huskers worked rapidly, stripping off
the dry husks with their hands. The big fine
ears they braided in strings, to save for seed.
Smaller ears they tossed into a pile. Big as our
corn pile was, it was husked in about four hours.

My mothers then served the feast.
The huskers were hearty eaters; for, like
all young men, they had good
appetites; but we had a big
feast of meat, and even they
could not eat all. It was not
polite to leave any of the food,
and some had brought sharp
sticks on which they skewered
the meat they could not eat,
to take home with them.

[Illustration]

The feast over, the huskers
went to another field, singing
and yelling as they went.

We women had now to busy ourselves carrying
in our corn.

We loaded our two pack horses with strings
of braided ears, ten strings to a pony. The
smaller ears we bore to the village in our baskets,
to dry on our corn stage before threshing.

In midafternoon there were a few strings of
corn still left, and I was laying them by for the
next trip when I heard steps. I looked up and
saw Red Hand coming, leading his pony.

Red Hand did not speak, but he laid my
strings of corn on his pony and started for the
village. "He wants to help me take home my
corn," I thought. A young man did thus for
-----File: 115.png---------------------------------------------------------
the girl he admired. "Red Hand is brave, and
he owns a pony," I said to myself; and I forgot
all about Sacred-Red-Eagle-Wing.

My father returned with the pack horses
just as Red Hand was starting off; and I was
stooping to fill my basket, when suddenly there
came a sound, <i>poh-poh-poh</i>, as of guns; then
yells, and a woman screamed. Small Ankle
sprang for his war pony, which he had left hobbled
near the husking pile.

Our corn fields lay in a strip of flat land
skirted by low foot hills; and now I saw, coming
over the hills, a party of Sioux, thirty or
more, mounted, and painted for war. At the
edge of the hills they checked their ponies, and
those who had guns began firing down into our
gardens. Many of the Sioux were armed with
bows and arrows.

On all sides arose outcries. My brave father
dashed by with his ringing war whoop, <i>ui, ui, ui</i>;[1]
and after him Red Hand, lashing his pony and
yelling like mad. Red Hand had thrown away
my strings of corn, but I was not thinking of
my corn just then.

Women and children began streaming past
our field to the village. Brave young men rode
between them and our enemies, lest the Sioux
dash down and cut off some straggler. Two
lads, on swift ponies, galloped ahead to rouse the
villagers.

Meanwhile my father and others were fighting
off the Sioux from the shelter of some clumps
of small trees that dotted the flat: Our enemies

[Footnote 1: [u:] ï (pronounced like [=o][=o] [=e][=e], but quickly and sharply)]
-----File: 116.png---------------------------------------------------------
did not fight standing, but galloped and pranced
their horses about on the hillside to spoil our aim.

Suddenly a Sioux warrior, in trailing eagle-feather
bonnet, and mounted on a beautiful
spotted pony, dashed down the
hillside toward us, waving his
bow over his head; and from
our side I saw Red Hand,
gun in hand, riding to
meet him.

[Illustration]

As they drew near one another the Sioux
swerved, and an arrow, like a little snake, came
curving through the air. Red Hand's pony
stumbled and fell, the shaft in its throat; but
Red Hand, leaping to the ground, raised his gun
and fired. I saw the Sioux drop his bow and
ride back clinging desperately to his pony's
mane. Red Hand put his hand to his mouth
and I heard his <i>yi-yi-yi-yi-yah</i>,[1] the yell that a
warrior made when he had wounded an enemy.

On the side toward our village other cries
now arose, for the warriors were coming to our
help. The Sioux fled. Our men pursued them,
and at nightfall came back with one scalp.

All that night we danced the scalp dance.
A big fire was built. Men and women painted

[Footnote 1: y[)i] y[)i] y[)i] y[)i] yäh´]
-----File: 117.png---------------------------------------------------------
their faces black and sang glad songs. Old women
cried <i>a-la-la-la-la!</i>[**[1]] Young men danced, yelled
and boasted of their deeds. All said that Red
Hand was a brave young man and
would become a great warrior.

[Illustration]

The next day I was coming from the watering
place with my kettle. Just ahead of me
walked Waving Corn, a handsome girl two years
older than I. Red Hand passed by; shyly I
looked up, thinking to see him smile at me.

He was smiling at Waving Corn.

[Footnote 1: ä lä lä lä lä´]
-----File: 118.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




THIRTEENTH CHAPTER

MARRIAGE


And so I grew up, a happy, contented Indian
girl, obedient to my mothers, but loving them
dearly. I learned to cook, dress skins,
embroider, sew with awl and sinew, and cut
and make moccasins, clothing and tent covers.
There was always plenty of work to do, but I
had time to rest, and to go to see my friends;
and I was not given tasks beyond my strength.
My father did the heavy lifting, if posts or
beams were to be raised. "You are young,
daughter," he would say. "Take care you do
not overstrain!" He was a kind man, and
helped my mothers and me whenever we had
hard work to do.

For my industry in dressing skins, my clan
aunt, Sage, gave me a woman's belt. It was
as broad as my three fingers, and covered with
-----File: 119.png---------------------------------------------------------
blue beads. One end was made long, to hang
down before me. Only a very industrious girl
was given such a belt. She could not buy or
make one. No relative could give her the belt;
for a clan aunt, remember, was not a blood relative.
To wear a woman's belt was an honor.
I was as proud of mine as a war leader of his
first scalp.

I won other honors by my industry. For
embroidering a robe for my father with porcupine
quills I was given a brass ring, bought of
the traders; and for embroidering a tent cover
with gull quills dyed yellow and blue I was given
a bracelet. There were few girls in the village
who owned belt, ring and bracelet.

In these years of my girlhood my mothers
were watchful of all that I did. We had big
dances in the village, when men and women
sang, drums beat loud, and young men, painted
and feathered, danced and yelled to show their
brave deeds. I did not go to these dances
often, and, when I did, my mothers went with
me. Ours was one of the better families of the
tribe, and my mothers were very careful of me.

I was eighteen years old the Bent-Enemy-Killed
winter; for we Hidatsas reckoned by winters,
naming each for something that happened
in it. An old man named Hanging Stone then
lived in the village. He had a stepson named
Magpie, a handsome young man and a good
hunter.

One morning Hanging Stone came into our
lodge. It was a little while after our morning
-----File: 120.png---------------------------------------------------------
meal, and I was putting away the wooden bowls
that we used for dishes. The hollow buffalo
hoofs hung on the door for bells, I remember,
rattled clitter, clitter, clitter, as he raised and let
fall the door. My father was sitting by the fire.

Hanging Stone walked up to my father, and
laid his right hand on my father's head. "I
want you to believe what I say," he cried. "I
want my boy to live in your good family. I am
poor, you are rich; but I want you to favor
us and do as I ask."

He went over to my mothers and did likewise,
speaking the same words to both. He then
strode out of the lodge.

Neither my father nor my mothers said anything,
and I did not know at first what it all
meant. My father sat for a while, looking at
the fire. At last he spoke, "My daughter is
too young to marry. When she is older I may
be willing."

Toward evening Hanging Stone and his relatives
brought four horses and three flint-lock
guns to our lodge. He tied the four horses
to the drying stage outside. They had good
bridles, with chains hanging to the bits. On
the back of each horse was a blanket and some
yards of calico, very expensive in those days.

Hanging Stone came into the lodge. "I
have brought you four horses and three guns,"
he said to my father.

"I must refuse them," answered Small Ankle.
"My daughter is too young to marry."
-----File: 121.png---------------------------------------------------------

Hanging Stone went away, but he did not
take his horses with him. My father sent them
back by some young men.

The evening of the second day after, Hanging
Stone came again to our lodge. As before, he
brought the three guns and gifts of cloth, and
four horses; but two of these were hunting
horses. A hunting horse was one fleet enough
to overtake a buffalo, a thing that few of our
little Indian ponies could do. Such horses were
costly and hard to get. A family that had good
hunting horses had always plenty of meat.

After Hanging Stone left, my father said
to his wives, "What do you think about it?"

"We would rather not say anything," they
answered. "Do as you think best."

"I know this Magpie," said my father. "He
is a kind young man. I have refused his gifts
once, but I see his heart is set on having our
daughter. I think I shall agree to it."

Turning to me he spoke: "My daughter, I
have tried to raise you right. I have hunted
and worked hard to give you food to eat. Now
I want you to take my advice. Take this man
for your husband. Try always to love him.
Do not think in your heart, 'I am a handsome
young woman, but this man, my husband, is
older and not handsome.' Never taunt your
husband. Try not to do anything that will
make him angry."

I did not answer <i>yes</i> or <i>no</i> to this; for I
thought, "If my father wishes me to do this,
why that is the best thing for me to do." I
-----File: 122.png---------------------------------------------------------
had been taught to be obedient to my father.
I do not think white children are taught so, as
we Indian children were taught.

For nigh a week my father and my two
mothers were busy getting ready the feast foods
for the wedding. On the morning of the sixth
day, my father took
from his bag a fine
weasel-skin cap and
an eagle-feather war
bonnet. The first he
put on my head; the
second he handed to
my sister, Cold Medicine.
"Take these to
Hanging Stone's
lodge," he said.

[Illustration]

We were now
ready to march. I
led, my sister walking
with me. Behind us
came some of our
relatives, leading
three horses; and,
after them, five great
kettles of feast foods, on poles borne on the
shoulders of women relatives. The kettles held
boiled dried green corn and ripe corn pounded
to meal and boiled with beans; and they were
steaming hot.

There was a covered entrance to Hanging
Stone's lodge. The light was rather dim inside,
and I did not see a dog lying there until he
-----File: 123.png---------------------------------------------------------
sprang up, barking <i>wu-wu!</i> and dashed past me.
I sprang back, startled. Cold Medicine tittered.
"Do not be foolish," called one of our women
relatives. Cold Medicine stopped her tittering,
but I think we were rather glad of the dog. My
sister and I had never marched in a wedding
before, and we were both a little scared.

I lifted the skin door--it was an old-fashioned
one swinging on thongs from the beam over-*head--and
entered the lodge. Hanging Stone
sat on his couch against the puncheon fire screen.
I went to him and put the weasel-skin cap on
his head. The young man who was to be my
husband was sitting on
his couch, a frame of
poles covered with a
tent skin. Cold Medicine
and I went over
and shyly sat on the
floor near-by.

[Illustration]

The kettles of feast
foods had been set
down near the fire-*place,
and the three
horses tied to the corn
stage without. Hanging
Stone had fetched
my father four horses.
We reckoned the weasel cap and the war bonnet
as worth each a horse; and, with these and our
three horses, my father felt he was going his friend
one horse better. It was a point of honor in an
Indian family for the bride's father to make a
-----File: 124.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Plate II.--"I put the weasel-skin cap on his head[** ."]]
-----File: 125.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 126.png---------------------------------------------------------
more valuable return gift than that brought him
by the bridegroom and his friends.

As we two girls sat on the floor, with ankles
to the right, as Indian women always sit, Magpie's
mother filled a wooden bowl with dried
buffalo meat pounded fine and mixed with marrow
fat, and set it for my sister and me to eat.
We ate as much as we could. What was left,
my sister put in a fold of her robe, and we arose
and went home. It would have been impolite
to leave behind any of the food given us to eat.

Later in the day Magpie's relatives and
friends came to feast on the foods we had taken
to Hanging Stone's lodge. Each guest brought
a gift, something useful to a new-wed bride--beaded
work, fawn-skin work bag, girl's leggings,
belt, blanket, woman's robe, calico for a dress,
and the like. In the evening two women of
Magpie's family brought these gifts to my father's
lodge, packing them each in a blanket on her
back. They piled the gifts on the floor beside
Red Blossom, the elder of my two mothers.

Red Blossom spent the next few days helping
me build and decorate the couch that was
to mark off the part of our lodge set apart for
my husband and me. We even made and
placed before the couch a fine, roomy lazy-back,
or willow chair.

All being now ready, Red Blossom said to
me: "Go and call your husband. Go and sit
beside him and say, 'I want you to come to my
father's lodge.' Do not feel shy. Go boldly
and have no fear."
-----File: 127.png---------------------------------------------------------

So with my sister I slowly walked to Hanging
Stone's lodge. There were several besides
the family within, for they were expecting me;
but no one said anything as we entered.

Magpie was sitting on his couch, for this
in the daytime was used as white men use a
lounge or a big chair. My sister and I went
over and sat beside him. Magpie smiled and
said, "What have you come for?"

"I have come to call you," I answered.

"<i>Sukkeets</i>--good!" he said.

Cold Medicine and I arose and returned to
my father's lodge. Magpie followed us a few
minutes later; for young men did not walk
through the village with their sweethearts in
the daytime. We should have thought that
foolish.

And so I was wed.
-----File: 128.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




FOURTEENTH CHAPTER

A BUFFALO HUNT


My young husband and I lived together but
a few years. He died of lung sickness; and,
after I had mourned a year, I married Son-of-a-Star,
a Mandan. My family wished me to
marry again; for, while an Indian woman could
raise corn for herself and family, she could not
hunt to get meat and skins.

Son-of-a-Star was a kind man, and my father
liked him. "He is brave, daughter," Small
Ankle said. "He wears two eagle feathers, for
he has twice struck an enemy, and he has
danced the death dance. Three times he has
shot an arrow through a buffalo." It was not
easy to shoot an arrow through a buffalo and
few of my tribe had done so.

Spring had come, and in the moon of Breaking
Ice we returned to Like-a-Fishhook village.
Our hunters had not killed many deer the win-*
-----File: 129.png---------------------------------------------------------
*ter before, and our stores of corn were getting
low. As ours was a large family, Son-of-a-Star
thought he would join a hunting party that was
going up the river for buffaloes. "Even if we
do not find much game," he said, "we shall kill
enough for ourselves. We younger men should
not be eating the corn and beans that old men
and children need."

Small Ankle thought the plan a good one.
I was glad also, for I was to be one of the party.
Corn planting time would not come for a month
yet; and, after the weeks in our narrow winter
quarters, I longed to be out again in the fresh air.

There were ten in the party besides Son-of-a-Star
and myself: Crow-Flies-High, Bad Brave,
High Backbone, Long Bear, and Scar, and their
wives. Scar was a Teton Sioux who had come
to visit us.

My tribe now owned many horses, and
fewer dogs were used than when I was a little
girl. A party of buffalo hunters usually took
both hunting and pack horses; but our village
herd was weak and poor in flesh after the scant
winter's feeding, and we thought it better to
take only dogs. There was yet little pasture,
and the ground was wet and spongy from the
spring thaws. Only a strong, well-fed pony
could go all day on wet ground.

I took three of our family dogs. On the
travois of two I loaded robes for bedding, the
halves of an old tent cover, moccasins for myself
and husband, an ax, a copper kettle and a
flesher for dressing hides. My third dog dragged
-----File: 130.png---------------------------------------------------------
a bull boat, bound mouth down to the travois
poles. We planned to return by way of the
river, in boats.

We were clad warmly, for the weather was
chill. All had robes. I wore a dress of two
deer skins sewed edge to edge; the hind legs,
thus sewed, made the sleeves for my arms.

I had made my husband a fine skin shirt,
embroidered with beads. Over it he drew his
robe, fur side in. He spread his feet
apart, drew the robe high enough to
cover his head, and
folded it, tail end first,
over his right side; then
the head end over his
left, and belted the robe
in place. He spread his
feet apart when belting,
to give the robe a loose
skirt for walking in.

[Illustration]

We all wore winter
moccasins, fur lined, with
high tops. The men carried guns.
Buffalo hunters no longer used bows except
from horseback.

We started off gaily, in a long line. Each
woman was followed by her dogs. Two women,
having no dogs, packed their camp stuff on
their backs.

We made our first camp late in the afternoon,
at a place called Timber-Faces-across-River.
There was a spring here, of good water.
Crow-Flies-High and Bad Brave went hunting,
-----File: 131.png---------------------------------------------------------
while we women pitched our tent. We cut
forked poles and stacked them with tops together
like a tepee. We covered this frame with skins,
laced together at the edges with thongs. A
rawhide lariat was drawn around the outside
of the cover; and small logs, laid about the edges,
held the tent to the ground. We could not use
tent pins, for the ground was frozen. We
raised an old saddle skin on the windward side
of the smoke hole, staying it with a forked
pole, thrust through a hole in the edge. We
were some time building, as the tent had to be
large enough for twelve persons.

We finished just at dusk; and we were
starting a fire inside, when the two hunters
came in. Each packed on his back the side
and ham of an elk they had killed. Bad Brave
had laid a pad of dry grass across his shoulders
that the meat juice might not stain his robe.

It was getting dark, and, while we women
gathered dry grass for our beds, the two hunters
roasted one of the sides of meat. They
skewered it on a stick and swung it from the
drying pole. Standing on each side, the two
men swung the meat slowly, forth and back,
over the fire.

We were all hungry when we sat down to
eat. The fresh roasted ribs of the elk were
juicy and sweet, and with full stomachs we
felt sleepy, for the day's march had been long.
We gladly spread our robes and crept into our
beds, first covering a coal with ashes for the
morning fire.
-----File: 132.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

Next morning we had struck our tent and
loaded our dogs before the sun was well up.
We took only the tent
cover, leaving the poles.
Three of our men went
ahead to hunt. The rest
followed more slowly,
not to tire our dogs.
Now and then we
stopped to rest and
eat from our lunch
bags. These were of
dried buffalo heart
skins. Every woman
in the party carried
one of them tucked
under her belt. We had been careful to fill our
bags with cooked meat, from our breakfast.

My husband walked at my side if he talked
with me. At other times he went a little ahead;
for, if enemies or a grizzly attacked us, he
would thus be in front, ready to fight, giving
me time to escape.

Our trail led along the brow of the bluffs
overlooking the Missouri. There was a path
here, fairly well marked, made by hunting parties,
and perhaps by buffaloes.

Our second camp was at a place called the
Slides; for, here, big blocks of earth, softened
by the spring rains, sometimes slide down the
bank into the river. We found a spring a little
way in from the river, with small trees that
we could cut for tent poles.
-----File: 133.png---------------------------------------------------------

Our tent was hardly pitched when Son-of-a-Star
and Scar came in to say they had killed a
stray buffalo not far away. They had packed
part of the meat to camp on their shoulders,
and Son-of-a-Star had cut out the buffalo's
paunch and filled it with fresh
blood. While the two hunters
went back for the rest of the
meat, I put on my copper
kettle and made blood pudding.
It was hot and ready to
serve by the time they came
back. I had stirred the pudding
with a green choke-cherry
stick, giving it a
pleasant, cherry flavor.

We were a jolly party
as we sat around the
evening fire. The hot pudding
felt good in our stomachs, after the long
march. My good dogs, Knife-Carrier, Took-a-Scalp,
and Packs-a-Babe, I had fed with scraps of
meat from the dead buffalo, and they were dozing
outside, snuggled against the tent to keep
warm. <i>Okeemeea</i>,[1] Crow-Flies-High's wife,
fetched in some dry wood, which she put on
the fire. A yellow blaze lit up the tent and a
column of thin, blue smoke rose upward to the
smoke hole.

Crow-Flies-High filled his pipe and passed it
among the men. Hidatsa women do not smoke.

In the morning, on the way up, we had
forded a stream we call Rising Water creek.

[Footnote 1: O k[=e][=e] m[=e][=e]´ ä]
-----File: 134.png---------------------------------------------------------
My leggings and moccasins were still wet; and,
as I was wringing them out to dry over the fire,
I said to High Backbone's wife Blossom: "That
creek is dangerous. As I was fording it to-day,
I slipped in the mud and nearly fell in; but
I once got a good dinner out of that mud."

"How did you get a dinner out of mud?"
asked Blossom.

"I will tell you," I answered. "I was a
young girl then. My tribe had come up the
river to hunt buffaloes and we had stopped at
Rising Water Creek to make fires and eat our
midday meal. It was summer and the creek
was low, for there had been little rain. Some
little girls went down for water. They came
running back, much frightened. "We saw something
move in the mud of the creek," they
cried. "It is alive!"

We ran to the bank of the creek and, sure
enough, something that looked as big as a man
was struggling and floundering in a pool. The
water was roiled and thick with mud.

"We could not think what it could be. Some
thought it was an enemy trying to hide in the mud.

"A brave young man named Skunk threw off
his leggings, drew his knife, and waded out to
the thing. Suddenly he stooped, and in a
moment started to land with the thing in his
arms. It was a great fish, a sturgeon. It had
a smooth back, like a catfish. We cut up the
flesh and boiled it. It tasted sweet, like catfish
flesh. I do not remember if we drank the
broth, as we do when we boil catfish."
-----File: 135.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

"I have seen those fish," said Bad Brave.
"Sometimes when the Missouri falls after the
spring floods, one of them will be left stranded
on the sand; but I
never knew one to be
seen in Rising Water
creek. I know that
turtles are found
there, the big kind
that fight."

"I have heard that
white men eat turtles,"
said Long
Bear's wife. "I do
not believe it."

"They do eat turtles," said High Backbone,
"and they eat frogs. A white man told me.
I asked him."

"<i>Ey!</i> And such unclean things; I could
not eat them.[**P3: ,]" cried Bird Woman.

"There are big turtles in our Dakota lakes,"
said Scar. "They are so big that they drag
under the water buffaloes that come there to
drink. I once heard a story of a magic turtle."

"Tell us the story," said Son-of-a-Star.

"A brave young Dakota led out a war party,
of six men," began Scar. "They came into the
Chippewa country and wandered about, seeking
to strike an enemy. They found deserted
camps, sometimes with ashes in the fire pit still
warm; but they found no enemies.
-----File: 136.png---------------------------------------------------------

"One day they came to a beautiful lake. On
the shore, close to the water, was a grassy knoll,
rising upward like the back of a great turtle.

"The leader of the party had now begun to
lose heart. 'We have found no enemy,' he said.
'I think the gods are angry with us. We should
return home. If we do not, harm may come
to us.'

"'Let us rest by this knoll,' said one. 'When
we have smoked, we will start back home.'

"They had smoked but one pipe when the
leader said.[**P3: ,] 'I think we should go now. There
is something strange about this knoll. Somehow,
I think it is alive.'

"There was a young man in the party, reckless
and full of life, whom the others called the
Mocker. He sprang up crying, 'Let us see if it is
alive. Come on, we will dance on the knoll.'

"'No,' said the leader, 'an evil spirit may be
in the knoll. The hill may be but the spirit's
body. It is not wise to mock the gods.'

"'<i>Hwee</i>[1]--come on! Who is afraid?' cried
the Mocker. He ran to the top of the knoll,
and three of the party followed him laughing.
They leaped and danced and called to the
others, 'What do you fear?'

"Suddenly the knoll began to shake. It
put out legs. It began to move toward the
lake. It was a huge turtle.

"'Help, help!' cried the Mocker. He and
his friends tried to escape. They could not.
Some power held their feet fast to the turtle's
back, so that they could not move.

[Footnote 1: Hw[=e][=e]]
-----File: 137.png---------------------------------------------------------

"The great turtle plunged in the lake. The
men were never seen again."

[Illustration]

There was silence when Scar ended. Then
Crow-Flies-High spoke: "Those men were foolish.
One should
never make mock
of the spirits."
He paused, puffing
at his pipe and
blowing great
clouds from his
nostrils. "I know
a story of another
Dakota who came
to grief at a lake,"
he continued, as
he passed the
burning pipe for my husband to smoke.

"What is the story?" said Scar, smiling.

"We Hidatsas," said Crow-Flies-High,
"believe that all babies born in our tribe have
lived in another life. Some have lived in hills
we call Babes' Lodges. Others have lived as
birds or beasts or even plants.

"Down near the Dakota country is a lake.
It is magic; and in old times young men went
there to see what they had been in a former life.
If one got up early in the morning while the
lake was smooth, and looked in the water, he
saw in his shadow the shadow also of what he
had been. Some found this to be a bird, others
a plant, as a flower or a squash.
-----File: 138.png---------------------------------------------------------

"A Dakota Indian had married a Hidatsa
woman, and dwelt with our tribe. He was a
good man, but he had a sharp tongue. He
often got angry and said bitter words to his
wife. When his anger had gone, he felt sorry
for his words. 'I do not know why I have such
a sharp tongue,' he would say.

"One day, when hunting with some Hidatsas,
he came near the magic lake. 'I am going to
see what I was before I
became a babe,' he told
the others. In the morning
he went to the lake, leaned
over and looked. In his
shadow he saw what he had
been. It was a thorn bush.

[Illustration]

"With heavy heart, he
came back to camp. 'Now
I know why I have a sharp
tongue,' he cried. 'It is
because I was a thorn bush.
All my life I shall speak
sharp words, like thorns.'"

All laughed at Crow-Flies-High's story, none
more than Scar himself. "I am sure <i>I</i> was never
a thorn bush," he said, "for I speak sweet words
to my wife, even when she scolds me."

"Hey, listen to the man!" cried his wife.

"But stop talking, you men," she continued,
as she reached for a piece of bark to use
as a shovel. "It is time to sleep, for we must
be up early in the morning." And she began to
cover the fire with ashes.
-----File: 139.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




FIFTEENTH CHAPTER

THE HUNTING CAMP


We were up the next morning before the sun,
and, after a hasty breakfast, the men went out
to look for buffaloes. "The one we killed yesterday
may have strayed from a herd," Son-of-a-Star
said. He was hopeful that they might
find the herd near.

We women were getting dinner when the
men returned, having seen no buffaloes. I had
cut a green stick with prongs, on which I spread
slices of fresh buffalo steak, and held them over
the fire to broil. I had three juicy steaks,
steaming hot, lying on a little pile of clean grass,
when my husband came in. "<i>Sukkeets</i>--good!"
he cried; and he had eaten all three steaks before
I had the fourth well warmed through.

After dinner we broke camp and went on
about five miles to Shell Creek Lake. In the
afternoon of the following day we reached Deep
-----File: 140.png---------------------------------------------------------
Creek. We pitched our tent on a bit of rising
ground from which we scraped the wet snow with
a hoe. The weather was getting warmer. Ice
had broken on the Missouri the day we killed
the stray buffalo.

While we women busied ourselves with things
in camp, the men went to hunt, and five miles
farther on they discovered a herd of buffaloes
crossing the Missouri from the south side. Our
hunters, creeping close on the down-wind side,
shot five fat cows as they landed. Buffaloes
are rather stupid animals, but have keen scent.
Had our hunters tried to come at them from
the windward side, the herd would have winded
them a half mile away. As it was, no more
buffaloes crossed after the shots were fired, and
some that were in the water swam back to the
other side. A rifle shot at the Missouri's edge will
echo between the bluffs like a crash of thunder.

The hunters found an elm tree with low
hanging branches, and under it they built a
rude stage. Meat and skins of the slain buffaloes
they laid on the floor of the stage, out of
reach of wolves. Some of the meat they hung
on the branches of the elm.

Son-of-a-Star brought back two hams and a
tongue. I sliced the tough outer meat from the
hams, to feed to my dogs. The bones, with the
tender, inner meat, I laid on stones, around the
fireplace, to roast, turning them now and then
to keep the meat from scorching. The roasted
meat we stripped off, and cracked the hot bones
for the rich, yellow marrow.
-----File: 141.png---------------------------------------------------------

The next morning Crow-Flies-High called a
council, and we decided to cross over to the
other side of the river. "The main herd is
there," said Crow-Flies-High. "We should hunt
the buffaloes before they move to other pasture."
We thought he spoke wisely, and men and women
seized axes to cut a road through the willows
for our travois.

These we now loaded. The dogs dragged
them to the water's edge and we made ready
to cross. There were two other bull boats in
the party besides my own.

My husband helped me load my boat, and
we pushed off, our three dogs swimming after
us. We had bound our travois to the tail of
the boat, one upon the other. The long runners
dragged in the water, but the travois baskets,
raised to the boat's edge, were hardly wetted.

We landed, and I lent my boat to Scar to
bring over his wife and her camp stuff. Our
whole party crossed and brought over their goods
in two trips.

We packed our goods up the bank and made
camp. While we women were cutting poles for
our tent, we heard the men disputing. They
were seated in a circle near our pile of goods.
High Backbone had lighted a pipe.

"I say we should go across the river and get
the meat we staged yesterday," said Crow-Flies-High.
Others said, "No, there is better hunting
on this side. Let us go at once and find the
herd." And all took their guns and hastened
off but High Backbone, who stayed to guard
-----File: 142.png---------------------------------------------------------
the camp. We were afraid enemies might also
be following the herd.

But the hunters returned at evening without
having seen buffalo sign, and hungry--so
hungry that they ate up half our store of meat.
After supper, Crow-Flies-High called them to another
council. "I told you we should get the meat
we staged," he said. "The gods gave us that
meat. We should not waste it."

We recrossed the river the next morning and
fetched back most of the staged meat and skins,
reaching camp again in the early part of the
afternoon. Too busy to stop and eat, we spent
the rest of the day building stages and staking
out the green
hides to dry.

[Illustration]

The next day we found to our joy that the
wind had shifted to the west. Our stages were
now hung with slices of drying meat, and we
had built slow fires beneath. An east wind
would have carried the smoke toward the herd
and stampeded it.
-----File: 143.png---------------------------------------------------------

It was evening and getting dusk when Son-of-a-Star
came into the tent, saying, "Buffaloes
are on a bluff a quarter of a mile up the river.
I can see them moving against
the sky line." We listened and
heard the bulls roaring; so we
knew a herd was coming in.

We were careful to chop no
wood that evening, nor do anything
to make a noise. We
smothered our fires, and we
fed our dogs; for, with gorged
stomachs, they would be sleepy
and not bark. If a dog stirred
in the night, one of us went
out and quieted him.

[Illustration]

We made another crossing
the next morning to fetch over
the last of the meat we had
staged. We returned about
noon. The first woman to climb
the bank under our camp was
Scar's wife, Blossom. She
dropped her pack and came
running back, her hands at each
side of her head with two
fingers crooked, like horns, the sign for buffaloes.

We hastened into camp and saw the buffaloes
a quarter of a mile away, swarming over a bluff.
There was a bit of bad-land formation below,
round-topped buttes with grassy stretches
between. In these lower levels the sun had
-----File: 144.png---------------------------------------------------------
started the grass, and I think the buffaloes were
coming down into them to seek pasture.

Our hunters had come up from the boats,
guns in hand, and set off at once, creeping up
the coulees from the lee side, that the buffaloes
might not wind them. Presently I saw a flash
and a puff of smoke; then another, and another;
and the reports came echoing down the river
basin, <i>poh--poh--poh--poh, poh, poh!</i> like thunder,
away off. The herd took to their heels. Buffaloes,
when alarmed, usually run up-wind; but,
as the wind had shifted again to the east, this
would have taken the herd into the river; so
they swerved off and went tearing away toward
the north.

The hunters returned before evening. Son-of-a-Star
was the first to come in. "I shot two
fat cows," he cried. "I have cut up the meat
and put it in a pile, covered with the skins."
He had brought back the choice cuts, however,
the tongues, kidneys and hams. We ate the
kidneys raw.

In the morning we harnessed our dogs and
went out to the butchering place. As we
neared my husband's meat pile, I saw that he
had driven a stick into the ground and tied his
headcloth to it, like a flag. This was to keep
away the wolves. There were many of them
in the Missouri-river country then.

While the flag fluttered and they winded the
human smell, wolves would not touch the meat
pile.
-----File: 145.png---------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes in the fall, when hunters were
cutting up a dead buffalo, I have seen wolves,
coyotes, and foxes, a half hundred maybe,
stalking about or seated just out of bow shot,
awaiting the time the hunters left. All then
rushed in to gorge on the offal. The wolves
often snarled and bit at one another as they ate.

All these animals were great thieves; but the
kit foxes, I think, were boldest. I was once with
a hunting party, sleeping at night in a tent,
when I awoke, hearing some one scream. A
kit fox had stolen into the tent and walked over
the bare face of one of the sleeping women.
She was terribly vexed. "That bad fox stepped
his foot in my mouth," she cried angrily. In
the morning we found the fox had made off
with some of our meat.

Son-of-a-Star uncovered his meat pile, and
helped me load our travois, binding each load
to its basket with thongs. By long use I knew
how heavy a load each of my dogs was able to
drag. When I thought the travois held enough,
I lifted its poles and tried the weight with my
hands.

My husband and I packed loads on our own
backs. Mine, I remember, was a whole green
buffalo cow skin, a side of ribs and a tongue.
This was a heavy load for a woman, and my
husband scolded me roundly when we came in to
camp. "That is foolish," he said. "You will
hurt your back." I liked to work, however,
and I wanted to show the older women how much
I could carry.
-----File: 146.png---------------------------------------------------------

We remained in the camp about ten days.
The men would hunt until they made a kill.
Then we harnessed our dogs, and all went out
to fetch in the meat. To do this took us about
half a day. At other times, when not drying
meat, we women busied
ourselves making bull
boats, to freight our meat
down the river.

[Illustration]

I have said that I
had brought one boat
up from the village
on one of my dogs.
I now made another.
There were some
<i>mahoheesha</i>[1] willows
growing near the camp. I made the boat frame
of these, covering it with the green hide of a
buffalo cow. <i>Mahoheesha</i> willows are light,
tough, and bend to any shape. They make
good boat ribs.

When ready to move camp, I carried my
new boat down to the river, turned over my
head like a big hat. At the water's edge I
drove a stout stake into the mud, and to this I
fastened the floating boat with a short thong.

Skins and dried meat had been made up into
small bales. I packed these to the boat on my
back, using a two-banded packing strap. As
the river was not far from our camp and the
bank not very steep, I did not think this task a
hard one.

[**P3: no footnote for anchor 1]
-----File: 147.png---------------------------------------------------------

When the boat was filled, I covered the load
neatly with a piece of old tent skin, and to the
tail of the boat, I lashed my three travois. The
buffalo skin covering a bull boat was so laid
that the tail was to the rear of the boat. For
this reason we often spoke of the boat's <i>head</i>
and <i>tail</i>.

Meanwhile, Son-of-a-Star fetched the boat
I had brought up from the village, and I bound
it to the head of my newer boat. We were now
ready to embark. I waded out, climbed into
the empty, or passenger, boat, and called to
my dogs. They leaped in beside me.

Son-of-a-Star took off his moccasins and
rolled up his leggings. He handed me his
gun, loosed the thong that bound the boats
to the stake, pushed the boats into deeper
water, and climbed in. I handed him his
paddle.

[Illustration]

I had hewn this paddle from a cottonwood
log, only the day before. My own, lighter
and better made, I had brought with me
from the village. Each paddle had a large
hole cut in the center of the blade. Without
this hole, a paddle wobbled in the current.

On the front of my paddle blade, Son-of-a-Star
had painted a part of his war record, hoof
prints as of a pony, and moccasin tracks such as
a man makes with his right foot. Hoof and
footprints had each a wound mark, as of flowing
blood. Son-of-a-Star had drawn these marks
with his finger, dipped in warm buffalo fat and
red ochre.
-----File: 148.png---------------------------------------------------------

The marks were for a brave deed of my husband.
He once rode against a party of Sioux,
firing his gun, when a bullet went through his
right thigh, and killed his horse. The foot-*prints
with the wound marks meant that Son-of-a-Star
had been shot in his right leg.

On his own paddle my husband had marked a
cross within bars. These meant, "I was one
of four warriors to count <i>strike</i> on an enemy."

It was an Indian custom to mark a
warrior's honors, much as a soldier wears
stripes for the wounds he has had. I was
quite proud of the marks on my paddles.
I was a young woman, remember, and I
thought, "Not every woman has a husband
as brave as mine."

[Illustration]

Just before I got into my boat I had
paused to wash my sweaty face in the river,
and, with a little ochre and buffalo fat, I
painted my cheeks a bright red. I thought
this made me look handsome; and, too,
the paint kept my face from being tanned
by the sun, for I had a light skin. In those
days everybody painted, and came to feasts
with handsome faces, red or yellow. Now we
follow white men's ways, and we go about with
faces pale, like ghosts from the Dead village.
I think that is why some tribes call white men
<i>pale-faces</i>; because they do not paint and are
pale like ghosts.

Altogether there were eleven boats in our
fleet, two to each couple except Scar and his
wife, who had but one. At that, their one boat
-----File: 149.png---------------------------------------------------------
was enough, for they had small store of meat or
skins to take home. They were a young couple
and thought more of having a good time than
of doing any hard work.

We had launched our boats in a tiny bay,
and our paddles, dipping into the quiet backwater,
sent the waves rippling against the shore.
It was a crisp spring morning, and the sun, rising
almost in our faces, threw a broad band of gold
over the water. In the shadow of the opposite
bank, a pelican was fishing. He paused to gaze
at us, his yellow beak laid against his white
plumage; then calmly went to fishing again.
Out in mid-current, an uprooted tree swept by,
and our skin boats, as they swung out of the
bay, passed a deadhead that bobbed up and
down, up and down. Then with a roar, the current
caught us and bore us swiftly away.

[Illustration]
-----File: 150.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




SIXTEENTH CHAPTER

HOMEWARD BOUND


When using her bull boat to cross over the
river, a woman knelt in the bow and dipped her
paddle in front of her; but, with a second and
freighted boat in tow, my husband and I paddled,
seated one at each side of our boat. We had
not much need to use our paddles as long as
we rode the current.

Crow-Flies-High led the way. We had gone, I
think, an hour or two, and Crow-Flies-High's boat
was rounding a point, when I saw him rise to his
knees and back water with his paddle. My husband
and I speeded up; and, as we came near,
Crow-Flies-High pointed to the bank just below
the point. It was thickly covered with buffaloes.

Scar's wife put her hand to her mouth for
astonishment, but made no sound. If buffaloes
have not good sight, they have keen ears;
and she knew better than to cry out.
-----File: 151.png---------------------------------------------------------

A bit of woodland stretched along the shore
farther on. Crow-Flies-High signed for us to follow,
and we floated silently down to the end
of the woods, where the trees hid us from the
herd. The men sprang out and held the boats
while we women landed.

The bank was high and rather steep, but
at its foot was a narrow bench of sand a foot or
more above the water's level. We hastily unloaded
our boats and dragged them out upon
this sand.

Along the Missouri's edge are always to be
found dead-and-dry willow sticks, left there by
the falling current. I fathered an armful of
these, and, having climbed the bank, laid them
together in a kind of floor. Son-of-a-Star now
helped me fetch up our bundles, and we piled
them on this willow floor. He also brought up
my two boats. These I turned, bottom up, over
my pile of bundles, to keep off frost and rain.

The men now seized their guns and hastened
off after the buffaloes. It was about noon. I
think we had spent less than an hour unloading
the boats and packing them and our stuff
to the top of the bank.

While our hunters were stalking the herd,
we women stayed in camp, keeping very quiet,
and stilling the dogs if they whined or barked.
Before long we heard the <i>poh-poh-poh!</i> of guns,
and knew the herd was started. We now
arose and began gathering sticks for a fire. I
think the first man to return struck fire for us,
and we got dinner.
-----File: 152.png---------------------------------------------------------

We did not trouble to set up our tent. "The
weather is not cold," said Crow-Flies-High's wife.
"We can sleep in the open air." I cut buck-*brush
bushes and spread a robe over them for my
bed. Dry grass stuffed under one end of the robe
did for a pillow. My covering
was a pair of buffalo skins.
We were weary and went to
bed early. The night was
clear; and, with the fresh
river air blowing in my face,
I soon fell asleep.

We were astir the next
morning at an early hour. While
Son-of-a-Star started a fire, I
went to fill my copper kettle at
the river. My husband had
asked me to boil him some
meat, for the broth; for in old
times we Indians drank broth instead of coffee.

[Illustration]

The river's roar, I thought, sounded louder
than usual; and, when I reached the edge of the
high bank, I saw that the current was thronged
with masses of ice. This amazed me, for the
river had been running free for a fortnight.
The Missouri is never a silent stream, and now
to the roar of its waters was added the groaning
and crashing of the ice cakes, as they grated and
pounded one another in the current.

When the Missouri is running ice, the mid-*current
will be thronged, well-nigh choked, with
ice masses, but near the banks, where are shallows,
the water will be free, since here the
-----File: 153.png---------------------------------------------------------
stream is not deep enough to float the ice
chunks. On the side of the river under our
camp was a margin of ice-free water of this kind;
and I now saw, out near the edge of the floating
ice, two bull boats bound
together, with a woman in
the foremost, paddling with
all her might. She was struggling
to keep from being
caught in the ice and crushed.

[Illustration]

I ran down the bank to
the bench of sand below, just
as the boats came sweeping
by. The woman saw me and
held out her paddle crying,
"Daughter, save me!" I seized
the wet blade, and tugging hard,
drew the boats to shore. The woman
was <i>Amaheetseekuma</i>,[1] or Lies-on
Red-Hill, a woman older than I, and my friend.

Lies-on-Red-Hill, though rather fat, scrambled
quickly out of the boat and began tumbling her
bundles out upon the sand. The other women
of our party now came down, and we helped my
friend carry her bundles up to the camp.

As we sat by the fire, wringing and drying her
moccasins, Lies-on-Red-Hill told us her story:
"My husband, Short Bull, and I were hunting
buffaloes. We dried much meat, which I loaded
in my two boats, to freight down the river.
While I paddled, Short Bull was to go along the
shore with our horses. 'We will meet at Beaver
Wood,' he said, 'and camp.' But I did not find

[Footnote 1: A mä h[=e][=e]t´ s[=e][=e] k[u:] mä]
-----File: 154.png---------------------------------------------------------
him at Beaver Wood. Then ice came. I was
afraid to camp alone, and tried to paddle down
stream, keeping near the shore, where was no ice.
More ice came, and I feared I should be upset
and drown."

It was not until afterwards, when we reached
our village, that we learned why Short Bull did
not meet his wife. He got to
Beaver Wood ahead of her.
Not finding her, and thinking
she had passed him, he went
on to the place where they
had agreed to make their
second camping. When again
she did not come, he became
alarmed, and returned up
the river looking for her. In
the morning he saw the river
was full of ice. "She is
drowned," he thought. And
he went on to Like-a-Fishhook
village.

[Illustration]

Lies-on-Red-Hill's father was an old man
named Dried Squash. He was fond of his
daughter, and, when he heard she was drowned,
he put her squash basket on his back and went
through the village weeping and crying out,
"Lies-on-Red-Hill, dear daughter, I shall never
see you again." He wanted to leap into the
river and die, but his friends held him.

Lies-on-Red-Hill rested in our camp two days.
The third morning the river was running free
again, and she loaded her boats and paddled off
-----File: 155.png---------------------------------------------------------
down stream. The rest of us stayed one more
day, to finish drying and packing our meat.
Then we, too, loaded our boats and started down
the river.

We floated with the current, and the second
day sighted Stands-Alone Point, or Independence,
as white men now call it. Here a party of Mandans
were just quitting camp. They pushed their
boats into the current and caught up with us.
"We knew you were coming," they said. "Lies-on-Red-Hill
told us. She passed us yesterday."

Our united party floated safely down until
we were two miles below what is now Elbowoods.
Here, to our astonishment, we found that the
current was hardly running, and the water was
backing up and flooding the shores. We rounded
a point of land, and saw what was the matter.
Ice, brought down on the current, had jammed,
bridging the river and partly damming it.

Fearing to go farther, we were bringing our
boats to land, when we heard the sound of a gun
and voices calling to us. On the opposite shore
stood two white men, waving handkerchiefs.

We paddled across and landed. The white
men, we found, were traders, who had married
Indian women. They had a flat boat, loaded
with buffalo skins and furs. With them was
Lies-on-Red-Hill. One of the traders we Indians
had named Spots, because he had big freckles on
his face.

Like-a-Fishhook village was yet about fifteen
miles away. While the rest of our party waited,
one of the men went afoot, to notify our relatives.
-----File: 156.png---------------------------------------------------------
They came about noon, the next day, with ponies
and saddles to help us bring home our goods.
The saddles were pack saddles, made with horn
frames.

It took four ponies to pack the dried meat
and skins my husband and I had brought. I
loaded my boats on the travois of two of my
dogs.

We reached Like-a-Fishhook village at sunset.
Lies-on-Red-Hill came with us, to the great
joy of her father.

[Illustration]
-----File: 157.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER

AN INDIAN PAPOOSE


My father was overjoyed to see me and my
husband again, and he was glad for the store of
meat that we brought. We had a real feast the
next day. I boiled green corn, shelled from the
cob and dried the summer before, and packed
away in skin bags. We were fond of this corn,
and had little of it left. Strikes-Many Woman
parched ripe sweet corn, pounded it in a mortar
with roast buffalo fats, and kneaded the meal
into little balls.

With these corn messes and boiled dried buffalo
meat we made a big feast and called in all
our relatives. To each woman guest, as she
went away again, I gave a bundle of dried buffalo
meat; and I thus gave away one of the four pony-*loads
of meat I had brought home. It was an
Indian custom that, when a hunter brought in
meat of a deer or buffalo, it belonged to his wife;
-----File: 158.png---------------------------------------------------------
and we should have thought her a bad woman,
if she did not feast her relatives and give to them.

My father sat with his cronies at the right
of the fireplace, at our feast. We women ate
apart, for men and women do not sit together at
an Indian feast. I heard my father talking with
his friend, Lean Wolf: "Every spring, when I was
young, we fired the prairie grass around the Five
Villages. Green grass then sprang up; buffaloes
came to graze on it, and we killed many."

"Those were good days," said Lean Wolf.
"There were many buffaloes then."

"It is so," said my father. "It is now seven
years since a herd was seen near our village.
White men's guns have driven them away. And
each year we kill fewer deer."

"I have heard that some Sioux families
starved last winter," said Lean Wolf.

"They starved, because they are hunters and
raise no corn," said my father. "We Hidatsas
must plant more corn, or we shall starve; and we
must learn to raise white men's wheat and potatoes."
Small Ankle was a progressive old man.

One morning, not long after our feast, Red
Blossom came in from the woods with news that
the wild gooseberry vines were in leaf. This was
a sign that corn planting time was come, and we
women began to make ready our corn seed and
sharpen our hoes.

I had been thinking of my father's words to
Lean Wolf. "They are wise words," I told my
mothers. "We should widen our fields, and plant
more corn." While they busied themselves with
-----File: 159.png---------------------------------------------------------
planting, I worked with my hoe around the edges
of our two fields, breaking new ground.

Having thus more ground to work over, my
mothers planted for more than a month, or
well into June. The last week of our planting,
Red Blossom soaked her corn seed in tepid
water. "It will make the seed sprout earlier,"
she said, "so that the ears will ripen before frost
comes."

Our fall harvest was good. My two mothers
and I were more than a week threshing and winnowing
our corn; but some families, less wise
than ours, had not increased their planting, and
had none too much grain to lay by for winter.
This troubled our chief men. "The summer's
hunt has been poor," they said. "If our winter's
hunting is not better, we shall be hungry
before harvest comes again."

They had twice called a council to talk of
the matter, when scouts brought word that
buffaloes had been seen. "Big herds have come
down into the Yellowstone country," they said.
The Black Mouths thought we should make our
winter camp there, in tepees; and they went
about choosing a winter chief.

But no one wanted to be winter chief.
Camping in the Yellowstone country in skin
tents, was not like our wintering in earth lodges
in the woods near our village. The people
expected their chief's prayers to keep enemies
away and bring them good hunting. If ill
luck came to any in the camp, they blamed the
winter chief.
-----File: 160.png---------------------------------------------------------

The Black Mouths offered gifts to one or
another of our chief men, whose prayers we knew
were strong; but none would take them. At
last, they gave half the gifts to <i>Eydeeahkata</i>,[1]
and half to Short Horn. "You shall take turns
at being chief," they said. "<i>Eydeeahkata</i> shall
lead one day and Short Horn the next."

The two leaders chose Red Kettle to be their
crier. The evening before we started he went
through the village crying, "We move to-morrow
at sunrise. Get ready."

Our way led up the Missouri, above the bluffs;
and most of the time we were within sight of
the river. Now and then, if the current made a
wide bend, we took a shorter course over the
prairie. <i>Eydeeahkata</i> and Short Horn went
ahead, each with a sacred medicine bundle
bound to his saddle bow. The camp followed in
a long line. Some rode ponies, but
most went afoot. We camped
at night in our tepees.

[Illustration]

We made our eleventh camp on the north
side of the Missouri, a few miles below the

[Footnote 1: [E=]y d[=e][=e] äh´ kä tä]
-----File: 161.png---------------------------------------------------------
mouth of the Yellowstone. Here the Missouri
is not very wide, and its sloping banks make a
good place for crossing. A low bank of clean,
hard sand lay along the water's edge. We
pitched our tents about noon on this sand.
There were about a hundred tepees. They
stood in rows, like houses, for there was not room
on the sand to make a camping circle.

Small Ankle pitched his tent near the place
chosen for the crossing. The day was windy
and chill. With flint-and-steel my father struck
a fire, and we soon had meat boiling. After
our dinner he drove his horses to pasture.

Strikes-Many Woman fetched dry grass for
our beds, spreading it thickly on the floor against
the tent wall. On the edges of the beds next
the fireplace she laid small logs, to keep in the
grass bedding and to catch any flying sparks
from the fire.

The wind died at evening. Twilight fell,
and the coals in the fireplace cast a soft, red
glow on the tent walls. I sat near the tent
door. With robe drawn over my shoulders to
keep off the chill, I raised the skin door and
looked out. The new moon, narrow and bent
like an Indian bow, shone white over the river,
and the waves of the swift mid-current sparkled
silvery in the moonlight. I could hear the
swish of eddies, the lap-lapping of the waves
rolling shoreward. Over all rose the roar, roar,
roar of the great river, sweeping onward we
Indians knew not where.
-----File: 162.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Plate III.--"With horn spoon she filled her mouth with water."]
-----File: 163.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 164.png---------------------------------------------------------

My dogs were sleeping without, snugged
against the tent for warmth. At midnight one
of them stirred, pointed his nose at the moon and
broke into a howl. The howl soon grew to a
chorus, for every dog in the camp joined in. Far
out on the prairie rose the wailing <i>yip-yip-yip-yip-ya-a-ah!</i>[**see below || P3: [1]]
of a coyote. The dogs grew silent
again, and curled up, nose-in-tail, to sleep.

And my little son came into the world.

The morning sky was growing light when
Son-of-a-Star came into the tent. His eyes were
smiling as he stepped to the fireplace, for they
saw a pretty sight. Red Blossom was giving
my baby a bath.

She had laid him on a piece of soft skin,
before the fire. With horn spoon she filled her
mouth with water, held it in her cheeks until it
was warm, and blew it over my baby's body.
I do not think he liked his bath, for he squalled
loudly.

My husband laughed. "It is a lusty cry," he
said. "I am sure my son will be a warrior."

Having bathed my baby, Red Blossom bound
him in his wrapping skins. She had a square
piece of tent cover, folded and sewed along the
edges of one end into a kind of sack. Into this
she slipped my baby, with his feet against the
sewed end. About his little body she packed
cattail down.

On a piece of rawhide, she put some clean
sand, which she heated by rolling over it a red-hot
stone. She packed this sand under my

[**this looks like a footnote more correctly giving pronunciation,
but there is no footnote number, here or above after "yip-yip-yip-yip-ya-a-ah!"
the likely reference]

[Footnote 1: y[)i]p y[)i]p y[)i]p y[)i]p yä´ ä äh][**P3: 1]
-----File: 165.png---------------------------------------------------------
baby's feet; and, lest it prove too hot, she
slipped a piece of soft buckskin under them.

Over all she bound a wildcat skin, drawing
the upper edge over the baby's head, like a
hood.

The hot sand was to keep my baby warm.
This and the cattail down we placed in a baby's
wrappings only in winter, when on a journey.

[Illustration]
-----File: 166.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER

THE VOYAGE HOME


Meanwhile Small Ankle and other members
of the family were making ready to cross. "We
must hasten," my father said. "Ice chunks are
running on the current this morning. This
shows that up in the mountains the river is
freezing over and cold weather is setting in."

My mothers began packing soon after breakfast
and Son-of-a-Star came in to say that he
would take me across in our bull boat; for we
had brought one with us from the village.
Old Turtle began unpinning the tent cover while
I was still inside. She made the tent poles into
a bundle and bound them at the tail of the boat.
I stepped in with my baby in my arms and my
husband paddled the boat across.

Son-of-a-Star helped me up the bank on the
other side and gave me a place to sit where I
could watch the crossing. I folded a robe to
-----File: 167.png---------------------------------------------------------
sit upon, and, with another robe drawn snugly
over my shoulders and my baby in my arms,
I felt comfortable and warm.

My husband even made a small fire in a hollow
place in the ground near-by. One of my
women friends boiled some meat and gave me
the hot broth to drink; for I was weary with the
work of crossing and caring for my babe.

There were not enough boats in the camp for
all the people. Most of the old people and little
children were brought over in boats, and
some of the camp goods; but many families
floated their stuff over in tent covers, and, cold
as was the water, many of the men swam.

I had left my two mothers and old Turtle
loading their tent cover. Turtle had made a
big noose in the end of a lariat and laid it on the
sand. Over this she spread the skin cover, a
large one. She bent a green willow into a hoop,
laid it on the tent cover, and within the hoop
piled most of our camp goods. She now gathered
the edges of the cover together over the
pile, drew tight the noose, and tied it firm.
This tent-cover bundle my mothers and old
Turtle pushed out into the water as a kind of
raft. The willow hoop gave the raft a flat bottom
so that it did not turn over in the water.

The lariat that bound the mouth of the raft
was fastened to the tail of a pony we had named
Shaggy, and the end was carried into and about
the pony's mouth like a halter. Shaggy was
driven into the stream and swam across, towing
the raft. The lariat was fastened to his tail so
-----File: 168.png---------------------------------------------------------
that, if the raft was swept down stream by the
current, it would not drag the pony's head, and
turn him from his
course.

[Illustration]

As I have said,
many families floated
their goods over in
these tent-cover rafts;
and not a few women,
in haste to cross,
swam clinging to their
rafts. One woman put
her little four-year-old
son on the top of
her raft, while she
swam behind, pushing and guiding it. Another
old woman, named Owl Ear, mounted her raft
and rode astraddle. Her pony landed in a
place where the shore was soft with oozy mud,
so that he could not climb out. Owl Ear had
to wade in the mud up to her middle to get her
raft ashore; and when she was climbing out she
slipped and sat down backwards again in the ooze.
She came up sputtering mud from her mouth and
much vexed with herself. "I think there must
be bad spirits in that mud, and they are trying to
pull me back," she called to me, as she came
waddling up the steep bank.

Before evening my mothers had brought all
their camp goods across. They raised the poles
of our tent and drew on the cover. It was wet,
but soon dried in the wind. We built a fire
inside. My baby had wakened up and was cry-*
-----File: 169.png---------------------------------------------------------
*ing. I loosened his wrapping and warmed him
by the tent fire, and he soon fell asleep. Red
Blossom dug a hole, slipped into it a kind of
sack of raw hide, for a mortar. We had brought
a pestle with us from the village, and with this
we pounded parched corn to a meal to boil with
beans. We ate a late supper and went to bed.

We camped on the bank three days, until all
had crossed. Our chiefs would not remain longer,
for they wanted to get into winter camp before
snow fell; and, on the morning of the fourth day,
we struck tents and made ready to march.

There was a mule in our family herd, a slow-going,
gentle beast, that I had bought of a Sioux
for a worthless pony and
some strings of corn. Son-of-a-Star
harnessed this mule
to a travois, and my baby
and I rode. Had our march
been in olden days, I should
have had to go afoot, carrying
my baby on my back.

[Illustration]

My husband had spread
a heavy bull-skin robe over
the travois basket and set
me on it, with another skin
folded under me for a cushion.
Through holes in the edge of
the bull skin Son-of-a-Star
passed a lariat; and when I was seated, with
my baby in my arms and my robe belted
snugly about us, my husband drew the lariat,
drawing the bull skin about my knees and ankles.
-----File: 170.png---------------------------------------------------------
The day was windy and cold, and the bull skin
kept the chill air from me and my babe.

Our leaders had chosen for our winter camp
a place called Round Bank, on a small stream
named Bark Creek. There were no trees here
for building earth lodges, so we camped in our
tepees, pitching them in a hollow, to shelter
them from the wind. The ground was frozen
so that we could not peg our tents to the ground,
but laid stones around the edges of the tent
covers. Such was our older-fashioned way. We
did not use wooden tent pegs much until after
we got iron axes.

My mothers fetched dry grass into our tent
for our beds, and made a fire under the smoke
hole. A tepee was kept warm with a rather
small fire, if it was well sheltered from the wind.

Ours was a big tent, for we had a big family.
With my two half brothers, Bear's Tail and Wolf
Chief, and their wives; and Red Kettle, Full
House, and Flies Low, younger sons of Red Blossom
and Strikes-Many Woman, we numbered
fourteen in all. This was a large number for
one tent. Ten were as many as a tepee usually
sheltered. Every member of the family had his
own bed, where he slept at night and sat in the
daylight hours.

My little son was ten days old the second
day we were in winter camp; and, though we
were hardly well settled, I found time to make
ready his naming feast. Having filled a wooden
bowl with venison and boiled dried green corn*
-----File: 171.png---------------------------------------------------------
*--foods I knew well were to his liking--I set it
before Small Ankle.

"I want you to name your grandson," I said
to him.

Small Ankle ate, thinking the while what
name he should give my son. Then he arose
and took my baby tenderly in
his arms, saying, "I name him
<i>Tsakahka Sukkee</i>,[1] Good Bird."
Small Ankle's gods were birds,
and the name was a kind of
prayer that they remember and
help my little son.

[Illustration]

Winter passed without mishap
to us. We had found no
buffaloes on the Yellowstone;
but our hunters thrice discovered
small herds near our camp
and brought in meat; and a
good many deer were killed.

Rather early in the spring,
the women of the Goose Society
danced and hung up meat for the goose spirits,
praying them for good weather for corn planting.
Then we all broke camp.

Most of the tribe returned to the Yellowstone
for the spring hunt, but my father wanted to go
up the Missouri. "We have not found the herds
our scouts saw in the fall," he said. "I am sure
they are farther up the river." One Buffalo and
his family joined us and we went up the river
and made camp. A small herd was sighted and
ten buffaloes were killed.

[Footnote 1: Tsä käh´ kä S[)u]k´ k[=e][=e]]
-----File: 172.png---------------------------------------------------------

We were building stages to dry the meat
when four more tents caught up with us, those
of Strikes Backbone, Old Bear, Long Wing, and
Spotted Horn, and their families. To each tent
owner my father gave a whole green buffalo hide
and a side of meat. The hides were for making
bull boats, for we were planning to return home
by water.

Ice broke on the Missouri and flocks of wild
ducks began coming north. My mothers were
eager to be home in time for the spring planting.
I made four new boats, giving one of them to
my father, and we made ready to go.

Son-of-a-Star partly loaded one of my boats
with dried meat, and put in his gun and ax. A
second boat, also partly loaded, he lashed to the
first; and a third, loaded to the gunwhale[**gunwale?] with
meat and hides, he bound to the tail of the
second. In this second boat sat my half brother,
Flies Low, a seventeen-year-old lad, with my
baby in his arms. My husband and I sat in the
first boat and paddled.

There were eleven boats in the six families
of our party. One or two families, having no
meat to freight, rode in single boats. My father
and two of the men did not come in the boats,
but rode along the bank, driving our horses.
They kept back near the foot hills, but in sight
of the river.

We were in no haste, and we made a jolly
party as we floated down the broad current. At
night we paddled to the shore. The men joined us
with the horses, and we camped under the stars.
-----File: 173.png---------------------------------------------------------

The Missouri is a swift stream, and at places
we found the waves were quite choppy. Especially
if a bend in the river carried the current
against the wind, the waves rolled and foamed,
rocking our boats and threatening to swamp us.
At such times we drew together, catching hold
of one another's boats. Thus bunched, our
fleet rode the choppy current more safely than a
single boat could have done.

The weather had set in rather warm when
we left our winter camp and the grass had already
begun to show green on the prairie. But, as
we neared the mouth of the Little Missouri, a
furious storm of snow and wind arose. The storm
blew up suddenly, and, as we rounded a bend in
the river, we rode into the very teeth of the wind.

Son-of-a-Star shouted to me to turn in to
the shore, though I could hardly hear his voice
above the wind. We plied our paddles with
all our might. Suddenly my husband stopped
paddling and leaned over the side of the boat,
nigh upsetting it. "<i>Eena, eena</i>"[1] I cried, scared
nearly out of my wits, and I grasped at the boat's
edge to keep from being tumbled in upon him.
Then I saw what was the matter. My husband
was lifting my little son out of the water.

I have said that Flies Low sat in our second
boat, with my little son in his arms. The baby
had grown restless, and Flies Low had loosened
the babe's wrappings to give freedom of his
limbs. A sudden billow rocked the boat, throwing
Flies Low against the side and tumbling my
little son out of his arms into the water.

[Footnote 1: [=e][=e] nä´]
-----File: 174.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

His loosened wrappings, by some good luck,
made my baby bouyant[**buoyant], so that he floated. He
was crying lustily when my husband drew him
out; but he was not strangling, and under his
wraps he was not even wet.

"I could not help it," said Flies Low afterwards.
"The boat seemed to turn over, and
the baby fell out of my arms." We knew this
was true and said nothing more of it.

Our party reached shore without further mishap.
We hastily unpacked two tents; and,
while some busied themselves pitching them,
others gathered wood and made fires.

That night the snow turned to a cold rain,
which the next day turned again into a heavy
snow. The summer birds had come north, and
after the storm was over we found many of them
frozen to death. It snowed for four days.

Small Ankle and his brother, Charging
Enemy, were driving their horses along the bank
when the storm overtook them. They did not
stop to camp with us, but pushed on through
-----File: 175.png---------------------------------------------------------
the storm to Like-a-Fishhook village. They
reached the village safely and drove their horses
down into the thick timber out of the cold wind.
There was a pond there, and the horses found
it warmer to wade out into the water than to
stand on the bank in the cold rain. But after
a while, grown weary with standing, they came
out; and, as the wind was blowing a gale, the
horses were chilled and three of them died.
Many others of our village herd died in the same
way.

Our own party, as soon as the storm was
over, re-embarked and floated safely down to
Like-a-Fishhook village.
-----File: 176.png---------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]




AFTER FIFTY YEARS


I am an old woman now. The buffaloes and
black-tail deer are gone, and our Indian ways
are almost gone. Sometimes I find it hard to
believe that I ever lived them.

My little son grew up in the white man's
school. He can read books, and he owns cattle
and has a farm. He is a leader among our
Hidatsa people, helping teach them to follow
the white man's road.

He is kind to me. We no longer live in an
earth lodge, but in a house with chimneys; and
my son's wife cooks by a stove.

But for me, I cannot forget our old ways.

Often in summer I rise at daybreak and steal
out to the cornfields; and as I hoe the corn I
sing to it, as we did when I was young. No one
cares for our corn songs now.
-----File: 177.png---------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes at evening I sit, looking out on
the big Missouri. The sun sets, and dusk steals
over the water. In the shadows I seem again
to see our Indian village, with smoke curling
upward from the earth lodges; and in the river's
roar I hear the yells of the warriors, the laughter
of little children as of old. It is but an old
woman's dream. Again I see but shadows and
hear only the roar of the river; and tears come
into my eyes. Our Indian life, I know, is gone
forever.

[Illustration]
-----File: 178.png---------------------------------------------------------




GLOSSARY OF INDIAN WORDS

English equivalents are in italics


/*
Ä hä h[e=]y´                               An exclamation; <i>Ho there!</i>
Ä hä h[u:]ts´                              <i>They come against us.</i>
Ä k[=e][=e]´ kä h[=e][=e]                  <i>Took-from-Him</i>; name of a dog.
Ä lä lä lä lä´                             Cry of triumph by women; made by curling
                                             the tip of the tongue backward and vibrating
                                             it against the roof of the mouth.
Ä mä h[=e][=e]t´ s[=e][=e] k[u:] mä        <i>Lies-on-Red-Hill</i>; name of a woman.
[=E][=e]´ k[u:] pä                         <i>Chum</i>.
[=E][=e] nä´                               An exclamation.
[=E][=e]t s[=e][=e] pä däh´ pä k[=e][=e]   <i>Foot moving</i>; name of a game.
[=E][=e]t s[u:]´ tä                        Name of the large tendon of a buffalo's neck.
[E=]y                                      An exclamation.
[E=]y d[=e][=e] äh´ kä tä                  Name of an Indian.
Hau (how)                                  The Indian salutation.
H[e=]y dä [e=]y´                           An exclamation of pleasure.
Hw[=e][=e]                                 <i>Hasten</i>; an exclamation.
Mä h[=o]´ h[=e][=e] shä                    A species of willow.
Mä k[u:]t´ sä t[=e][=e]                    <i>Clan cousin.</i>
Mä p[=e][=e]´                              <i>Meal made by pounding.</i>
Mä p[u:]k´ sä [=o] kï h[)e]                <i>Snake Head-Ornament</i>; a man's name.
M[=e][=e] dä´ h[=e][=e] kä                 <i>Gardeners' songs.</i>
M[=e][=e] d[=e][=e] päh´ d[=e][=e]         <i>Rising water</i>; name of a Hidatsa clan, or band.
Näh                                         <i>Go, come.</i>
Nä kä päh´                                 <i>Mush.</i>
O k[=e][=e] m[=e][=e]´ ä                   <i>Head-Ornament Woman</i>; a woman's name.
Sh[=e][=e]´ p[=e][=e] shä                  <i>Black.</i>
S[)u]k´ k[=e][=e]ts (or S[)u]kk[=e][=e])   <i>Good.</i>
Tsä käh´ ka S[)u]k´ k[=e][=e]              Name of Waheenee's son; from <i>tsakahka</i>, bird,
                                             and <i>sukkee</i>, good.
Tsïst´ skä                                 <i>Prairie chicken.</i>
[U:]´ ï                                    The Hidatsa war whoop.
[**P1 thinks the : goes with the U, not the W][**P2 agrees: see 115.png]
Wä h[=e][=e]´ n[=e][=e]                    <i>Cowbird</i>, or <i>Buffalo-bird</i>; name of the Indian
                                             woman whose story is told in this book.
W[=e]´ä                                    <i>Woman.</i>
W[u:] [u:] [u:]                            Imitation of a dog's bark.
Y[)i] y[)i] y[)i] y[)i] yäh´               A war cry of triumph, made with hand vibrated
                                             over the mouth or against the throat.
W[=e]´ äh t[=e][=e]                        A woman's name.
*/
-----File: 179.png---------------------------------------------------------




EXPLANATORY NOTES


<i>Page 9, l. 24</i>: "We had corn a-plenty" The Hidatsas and Mandans
were the best agriculturists of the north-plains Indians. Varieties
of corn developed by them mature in the semi-arid climate of western
North Dakota where our better known eastern strains will not
ripen. The varieties include flint, flour, and a kind of sweet corn
called <i>maikadishake</i>,[1] or gummy, which the Indians use for parching.
Hidatsa seed planted at the United States Agricultural Experiment
Station at Bozeman, Montana, has made surprising yields.

<i>Page 10, l. 29</i>: "the ghost land." A Hidatsa Indian believed he
had four ghosts. At death, one ghost went to the Ghost village, to
live in an earth lodge and hunt buffaloes as on earth; a second remained
at the grave until after a time it joined the first in the Ghost village
where they became one again. What became of the other two ghosts
does not seem to be known.

<i>Page 11, l. 20</i>: "The march was led by the older chiefs." A Hidatsa
chief was a man who by his war deeds, hospitality, and wisdom, came
to be recognized as one of the influential men of the tribe. He was
not necessarily an officer. When translating into English, Hidatsas
usually call the officer elected for any executive duty a <i>leader</i>, as war-party
leader, winter-camp leader, leader of the buffalo hunt. It
should be remembered that the activities of an Indian tribe are decided
in councils; and in these councils the eloquence and wisdom of
the chiefs had greatest weight. The Hidatsa word for chief, literally
translated, is excellent man, superior man.

<i>Page 13, l. 8</i>: "At this hour fires burned before most of the tepees."
In fall or winter the fire was within the tepee, under the smoke hole.

<i>Page 15, l. 13</i>: "for a woman to ... begin building her earth
lodge." While the work falling to an Indian woman was far from
light, she did not look upon herself as overburdened. Women were
more kindly treated by Hidatsas and Mandans than by some tribes.

<i>Page 17, l. 28</i>: "dried prairie turnips." The prairie turnip, <i>psoralea
esculenta</i>, is a starchy, bulbous root, growing rather plentifully on the
plains. Its food value is high. Attempts have been made unsuccessfully
to cultivate it.

<i>Page 17, l. 30</i>: "June berries." The June berry, <i>amelanchier
alnifolia</i>, is a small, hardwood tree, bearing sweet, dark-red berries.
Its branches were much used for making arrow shafts.

<i>Page 21, l. 14</i>: "young men fasted and cut their flesh." Such self-inflicted
tortures were not, as is often believed, for the purpose of
proving the warrior's fortitude, but were made as a kind of sacrifice
to the gods that these might pity the devotee and answer his prayers.
See Bible, I Kings, XVIII; 28.

<i>Page 24, l. 30</i>: "It was a long pipe with black stone bowl." The
stone bowl was carved from a hard kind of grey clay, anointed with
grease and baked in a fire to turn it black. It took a high polish.

[Footnote 1: mä´ ï kä dï shä k[)e]]
-----File: 180.png---------------------------------------------------------

<i>Page 35, l11[** l. 11]</i>: "Telling tales ... in ... autumn and winter." Tribal
myths, told of the gods, were often forbidden in summer when nature
was <i>alive</i>. In winter nature was <i>asleep</i> or <i>dead</i>. One could talk of
sleeping spirits without fear of offending them.

<i>Page 36, l. 5</i>: "Making ready her seed." The Hidatsas used the
greatest care in selecting their seed corn. Only large and perfect
ears were chosen. The best ear for seed was the <i>eeteeshahdupadee</i>,[1]
or muffled-head, so called because the kernels cover the cob quite to
the tip, making the ear look like an Indian with his head muffled up
in his robe.

<i>Page 36, l. 14</i>: "Wooden bowl." In olden days almost every
family owned several of these feast bowls. A large knot was split
out of a tree trunk with wedges and, after being hollowed out with
fire, was slowly carved into shape with flint tools. Some of these bowls
are beautiful examples of carving.

<i>Page 37, l. 16</i>: "Trying to parch an ear of corn." Parched corn
entered largely into the diet of our corn raising Indians. Among
eastern tribes, a warrior set forth on a long journey with a sack of
parched corn pounded to a meal. When hungry, he swallowed a
spoonful of the parched meal, washing it down with a pint of water.
In a short time the meal had absorbed the water, filling the stomach
with a digestible mass like mush.

Every farmer's lad should put away some ears of ripened sweet
corn in the fall, to parch of a winter's evening. Sweet corn was raised
by the Hidatsas and Mandans for parching only.

<i>Page 38, l. 21</i>: "Ground beans," or hog peanut; <i>amphicarpa falcata</i>.
These beans, like peanuts, are borne under ground.

<i>Page 38, l. 22</i>: "Wild potatoes," or Jerusalem artichoke. Roots of
<i>helianthus tuberosus</i>, a plant of the sunflower family.

<i>Page 41, l. 25</i>: "Who had been a black bear." Tradition has it
that the art and mysteries of trapping eagles were taught the Hidatsas
by the black bears. An eagle hunters' camp was conducted as a kind
of symbolic play, the hunters acting the ceremonies of the delivery
to the Indians of the eagle-hunt mysteries.

<i>Page 44, l. 17</i>: "Earth lodges well-built and roomy." The earth
lodge of the Mandans and Hidatsas was the highest example of the
building art among our plains tribes. Some of these lodges were
quite large, having a height of eighteen feet or more, and a floor diameter
exceeding sixty feet. Usually two or more families of relatives
inhabited the same lodge.

An earth lodge had four large central posts and beams, supporting
the roof; twelve surrounding posts and beams, supporting the
eaves; and a hundred rafters. The roof was covered with a matting
of willows over which was laid dry grass and a heavy coating of earth.

An earth lodge lasted but about ten years, when it was abandoned
or rebuilt. The labor of building and repairing these imposing structures,
especially in days when iron tools were unknown and posts
and beams had to be burned to proper lengths, must have been severe.

When the author first visited Fort Berthold reservation in 1906,
there were eight earth lodges still standing; in 1918 there were two.

[Footnote 1: [=e][=e] t[=e][=e] shä d[u:]´ pä d[=e][=e]]
-----File: 181.png---------------------------------------------------------

<i>Page 47, l. 18</i>: "An earthen pot." The potter's craft was practiced
professionally by certain women who had purchased the secrets
of the art. The craft was an important one, as much of Hidatsa cooking
was by boiling. Some of the earthen boiling pots held as much
as two gallons. A collection of earthen pots, fired in 1910 by Hides-and-Eats,
a Mandan woman nearly ninety years old, is in the American
Museum of Natural History.

<i>Page 49, l. 18</i>: "From her cache pit." The cache pit was a jug-*shaped
pit within or without the lodge, six or eight feet deep. It
was floored with willow sticks and its walls were lined with dry grass.
It was used to store the fall harvest.

Strings of braided ears were laid in series against the wall. Within
these was poured the threshed grain, in which were buried strings of
dried squash and sacks of beans and sunflower seed. Buffalo-Bird
Woman says there were five cache pits in use in her father's family.

Many families had a cache pit within the lodge to serve as a cellar.
Besides corn for immediate use, it held sacks of dried berries, prairie
turnips, packages of dried meat and even bladders of marrow fat.

The pits without the lodge with their stores of grain were carefully
sealed with slabs and grass, over which were trampled earth and
ashes. This was done to conceal the pits from any Sioux who might
come prowling around when the tribe was away in winter camp. If
a family lacked food in winter, they returned to their summer village
and opened one of these cache pit granaries for its stores of corn.

<i>Page 49, l. 31</i>: "Red Blossom pounded the parched corn ... in a corn
mortar." The corn mortar, or hominy pounder, is a section of a
cottonwood or ash trunk, hollowed out by fire. The pestal is of ash.
The mortar was sunk in the floor of the earth lodge and covered, when
not in use, by a flat stone.

Corn mortars are still used by the Hidatsas. Our grandmothers
in pioneer days also used them.

<i>Page 51, l. 4</i>: "Chief." A Hidatsa chief, as explained, was not
necessarily a tribal officer. His position was like that of an influential
citizen of a country village, who is often a member of the local school
or hospital board, is chosen to preside at patriotic meetings, and is
expected to extend hospitality and charity to those in need.

Hospitality, indeed, is the Indian's crowning virtue. In tribal
days, when one had food, all had food; when one starved, all starved.
A reservation Indian does not like to take pay for a meal, especially
from one of his own race; and he can not comprehend how any white
man having food can let another go hungry.

His hospitality is often a hindrance to the Indian's progress.
Indolent Indians eat up the food stores of industrious relatives.

<i>Page 56, l. 14</i>: "Dried meat pounded fine and mixed with marrow
fat." This was regarded as a delicate dish. Old people especially were
fond of it. The plains Indians usually had sound teeth, but their
coarse diet wore the teeth down so that old men found it hard to eat
dried meat unless it was thus pounded to shreds. Marrow fat was
used much as we use butter.
-----File: 182.png---------------------------------------------------------

<i>Page 57, l. 1</i>: "A doll, woven of rushes." Very good mats were
also woven of rushes.

<i>Page 58, l. 4</i>: "Tossing in a blanket." The blanket tossing game
has been found among widely separated peoples. In Don Quixote,
we are told how Sancho Panza unwilling participated in the game.

<i>Page 66, l. 6</i>[** : ?] "Every Hidatsa belonged to a clan." The clan
was, nevertheless, relatively weak among the Hidatsas, its functions
apparently having been usurped at least in part by the age societies.
(The Black Mouths were an age society. See chapter V).

In many tribes a man was forbidden to marry within his clan.

<i>Page 68, l. 25</i>: "He was a great medicine man." The story of
Snake Head-Ornament is a good example of the tales told of the old
time medicine men. Snake Head-Ornament's friendship for the bull
snake would seem uncanny even to a white man.

<i>Page 73, l. 1</i>: "In old times we Indian people had no horses."

At the time of America's discovery the Indians had domesticated
the llama in the Peruvian highlands; the guinea pig, raised for food
by many South American tribes; turkeys, and even bees, in Mexico;
dogs, developed from wolves or coyotes, were universally domesticated
among the North American tribes.

Indian dogs were used as watch dogs and as beasts of burden.
Dog flesh was eaten by many tribes. An edible, hairless variety of
dog, bred by the Mexican Indians has become extinct.

<i>Page 77, l. 23</i>: "My grandmother brought in some fresh sage."
The sage was a sacred plant.

<i>Page 81, l. 10</i>;[**P3: :] "Our dogs dragged well-laden travois." Older
Indians say that a well-trained dog could drag a load of eighty pounds
on a travois.

<i>Page 85, l. 6</i>: "The big tendon ... we Indians call the <i>eetsuta</i>."[1]
When dried this tendon becomes hard, like horn; and arrow points
and even arrow shafts were carved from it.

<i>Page 87, l. 32</i>: "Coyote Eyes, a Ree Indian." The Rees, or Arikaras,
are an offshoot of the Pawnee tribe, whose language they speak. They
removed to Fort Berthold reservation and settled there with the
Hidatsas and Mandans in 1862.

<i>Page 92, l. 7</i>: "To embroider with quills of gull." The tribe used
to make annual jouneys[**journeys] to the lakes near Minot, North Dakota,
where, older Indians say, the gulls nested. The feathers were gathered
along the beach. The quill was split, the flat nether half being the
part used. Quills were dyed with native vegetable colors.

<i>Page 99, l. 10</i>: "Bear Man was an eagle hunter." The tail feathers
of the golden eagle were much worn by all the plains tribes. These
feathers, in eagles under two years of age, are of a pure white, with
dark brown or black tips, and were much prized. Eagle hunting was
a highly honored occupation.

<i>Page 112, l. 17</i>: "The huskers came into the field yelling and singing."
Buffalo-Bird Woman laughingly adds, that the yelling was by
young men who wanted their sweethearts to hear their voices.

[Footnote 1: [=e][=e]t s[u:]´ tä]
-----File: 183.png---------------------------------------------------------

<i>Page 114, l. 2</i>: "The hollow buffalo hoofs rattled." The earth
lodge door was a heavy buffalo skin, stretched when green on a frame
of light poles. It was swung from the beam above by heavy thongs.
The puncheon fire screen stood between it and the fireplace, about
which the family sat or worked. As the moccasined tread of a visitor
made little noise, a bunch or two of buffalo hoofs was hung to a bar
running across the middle of the door.

The hoof was prepared by boiling and removing the pith. Its
edges were then trimmed and a hole was cut in the toe. Through
this hole a thong was run with a knotted end, to keep the hoof from
slipping off. As the door dropped after an entering visitor, the hollow
hoofs fell together with a clittering noise, warning the family.

<i>Page 118, l. 28</i>: "Hanging Stone." A literal translation of the
Hidatsa word. It refers to a form of war club, a short stick, from an
end of which swung a stone sewed in a piece of skin.

<i>Page 125, l. 3</i>: "With ankles to the right, as Indian women sit."
A warrior sat Turkish fashion, or, often, squat-on-heels. An Indian
woman sat with feet to the right unless she was left-handed, when
feet were to the left.

<i>Page 125, l. 6</i>: "Mixed with marrow fat." Marrow fat was obtained
by boiling the crushed bones of a buffalo in a little water. The
yellow marrow as it rose was skimmed off and stored in bladders or
short casings made of entrails, like sausage casings.

<i>Page 126, l. 10</i>: "I have come to call you." Buffalo-Bird Woman
means that her father invited his son-in-law to come and live in his
earth lodge. If he had not sent this invitation, the young couple
would have set up housekeeping elsewhere.

<i>Page 128, l. 37</i>: "Only a strong, well-fed pony could go all day on
wet ground." Nature designed the solid hoof of the horse for a prairie
or semidesert country. A pony finds it hard to withdraw his hoof in
wet spongy soil, and soon tires. A deer or buffalo, with divided hoof,
runs upon wet ground with comparative ease. Every farmer's boy
knows that an ox will walk through a swamp in which a horse will mire.

<i>Page 142, l. 26</i>: "With two fingers crooked like horns, the sign for
buffaloes." So many languages were spoken by our Indian tribes,
that they found it necessary to invent a sign language so that Indians,
ignorant of each other's speech, could converse. A well-trained deaf
mute and an old plains Indian can readily talk together by signs.

<i>Page 143, l. 4</i>: "Creeping up the coulees." A coulee in the Dakotas
is a grassy ravine, usually dry except in spring and autumn, and after
a heavy rain.

<i>Page 157, l. 19</i>: "They starved, because they are hunters and raise
no corn." The Hidatsas and Mandans as agriculturists felt themselves
superior to the hunting tribes. Small-Ankle refers here to the western,
or Teton, Sioux. The eastern Sioux were corn raisers.

<i>Page 158, l. 10</i>: "My mothers and I were more than a week threshing."
In the summer of 1912, the author had Buffalo-Bird Woman
pace off on the prairie the size of her mothers' field, as she recollected
it. It measured one hundred and ninety yards in length by ninety
yards in width. Such were some of the fields which in olden days
were cultivated with wooden sticks and bone hoes.
-----File: 184.png---------------------------------------------------------




SUPPLEMENT

HOW TO MAKE AN INDIAN CAMP


Young Americans who wish to grow up strong and healthy should
live much out of doors; and there is no pleasanter way to do this than
in an Indian camp. Such a camp you can make yourself, in your
back yard or an empty lot or in a neighboring wood.


The Lodge

Buffalo-Bird Woman has told us of the earth lodges of her people.
They were for permanent abode. Hunters, however, camping but a
day or two in a place, usually put up a pole hunting lodge.

Four forked poles were stacked, as in Figure 1.

[Illustration: Figure 1]

[Illustration: Figure 2]

Around these in a circle, other poles were laid, as in Figure 2, for
a frame.

For cover buffalo skins, bound together at the edges, were drawn
around the frame in two series, the lower series being laid first. The
peak of the pole frame was left uncovered, to let out the smoke.

Instead of buffalo skins, gunny sacks may be used, fastened at
the edges with safety pins or with wooden skewers; or strips of canvas
or carpet may be used. Three or four heavier poles may be laid
against the gunny-sack cover to stay it in place.

The door may be made of a gunny sack, hung on a short pole.

Indians often raised a piece of skin on a forked pole for a shield,
to keep the wind from driving the smoke down the smoke hole.
-----File: 185.png---------------------------------------------------------

Figure 3 shows the finished lodge with gunny-sack cover, door,
and wind shield. The last is made of a piece of oil cloth.

[Illustration: Figure 3]

[Illustration: Figure 4]


Booth

Buffalo-Bird Woman tells of the booth which Turtle made in her
cornfield. A booth is easily made of willows or long branches.

A short digging stick will be needed. This was of ash, a foot or
two in length, sharpened at one end by burning in a fire. The point
was often rubbed with fat and charred over the coals to harden it.
(Such a digging stick was not the kind used for cultivating corn.)

[Illustration: Figure 5]

[Illustration: Figure 6]
-----File: 186.png---------------------------------------------------------

If you have no ash stick, a section of a broom handle will do[**.]

With a stone, drive the digging stick four inches in the ground,
as in Figure 4. Withdraw digging stick and repeat until you have
six holes set in a circle. The diameter of the circle should be about
five feet.

Into the six holes set willows, or branches, five or six feet high,
as in Figure 5.

Weave or bind tops together so as to make a leafy roof, or shade,
as in Figure 6. For binding, use strips of elm bark; or slender willows,
twisted, so as to break the fibers.


Fireplace

Indians, when journeying, made the campfire outside the lodge
in summer; inside the lodge, in winter. Usually a slight pit was dug
for the fireplace, thus lessening danger of sparks, setting fire to prairie
or forest. The fire was smothered with earth when camp was forsaken.

[Illustration: Figure 7]

[Illustration: Figure 8]


Broiling Meat

Indians broiled fresh meat on a stick thrust in the ground and
leaning over the coals. Often a forked stick was cut.[**should be ,] the meat was
laid on the prongs, and it was
held over the coals until broiled.
In Figures 7 and 8 both methods
are shown.


Drying Meat

[Illustration: Figure 9]

Buffalo-Bird Woman often
speaks of dried buffalo meat.
If you want to know what it
was like, cut a steak into thin
pieces, and dry on a stage of
green sticks, three feet high. This may be done in the sun; or, a small
fire may be made beneath, to smoke as well as dry the meat. In
-----File: 187.png---------------------------------------------------------

Figures 9 and 10 two forms
of drying stage are shown.

[Illustration: Figure 10]


Cooking Dried Meat

A pail or small bucket
will do for kettle. It should
be swung from a tripod by
stick-and-thong, as in Figure
11. Put in dried meat
with enough water to cover,
and bring to a boil. The
broth may be used as the
Indians used it, for a drink.


Parching Corn

Ripe sweet corn, thoroughly dried, is best for parching; but field
corn will do nearly as well. Drop a handful of the shelled corn in a
skillet with a little butter. Cover skillet and set on the fire. Shake
skillet from side to side to keep corn from scorching.

In the earth lodge, Hidatsa women parched the grain in an earthen
pot, stirring it with a stick. Indian boys, when out herding horses,
often carried two or three ears of corn for lunch. An ear was parched
by thrusting a stick into the cob, and holding it over the coals, as in
Figure 12.

[Illustration: Figure 11]

[Illustration: Figure 12]

A steak broiled Indian fashion over the coals, or a kettle of boiled
dried meat, with a cupful of parched corn, will make just such a meal
as Indians often ate.
-----File: 188.png---------------------------------------------------------




HINTS TO YOUNG CAMPERS


Do not throw away bits of unused food, but burn or bury them.
Unless thus destroyed, the decaying food will attract insects, which
often bring disease. Bury all tin cans.

Potatoes may be kept fresh as in your cellar by burying them in
loose earth or sand.

Hang out your blankets and bed clothing to be aired an hour or
two each day, preferably in the morning.

Indians had no soap. Indian women scoured out their earthen
cooking pots with rushes. You may clean your camp kettle and pans
in the same way; or, if no rushes can be found, scour with coarse grass
dipped in wet sand or sandy mud, and drench with clean water.

Axes, clothing, shoes, and the like may be stored out of the way
by making them into a long bundle, with a cloth or thick paper, and
lashing them to one of the upright tent poles within the tent.

Indian children were fond of chewing green cornstalks, for the
sweet juice they contained. If your camp is near a cornfield about
the time the corn is in milk, you will find the chewed stalks almost as
sweet as some varieties of sugar cane.
-----File: 189.png---------------------------------------------------------




INDIAN COOKING


Young people often wonder what Indian cooking is like, and
groups of them--as a class in Sunday school or day school--may like
to eat a meal of Indian foods. Following are a few common Hidatsa
dishes. Usually, but one kind of food was eaten at a single meal[**.]


<b>Madapozhee Eekteea[1]</b>, <i>or Boiled Whole Corn</i>

Pour three pints of water into a kettle and set on the fire. Drop in
a pint of shelled field corn, a handful of kidney beans and a lump of
suet the size of an egg. Boil until the corn kernels burst open.


<b>Manakapa</b>[2], <i>or Mush</i>

Put a pint of shelled field corn into a canvas cloth, and with ax or
stone pound to a coarse meal; or the corn may be ground in a coffee mill.
To this meal add a handful of kidney beans, and boil in two pints of
water. The Hidatsa mortar for pounding corn into meal is shown in
cut on page 156.


Dried, or Jerked, Meat

Cut some beefsteak, round or sirloin, into thin strips. Dry the strips
on a stage of small poles (see cut on page 141) in the open air or over a
slow fire, or in the kitchen oven, until brittle and hard. Meat thus
dried could be kept for months. Warriors and hunters often ate
jerked meat raw or toasted over a fire. In the lodge, it was more often
boiled a few minutes to soften it; and the broth was drunk as we drink
coffee. (See also "Drying Meat", page 185.)


Pemmican

Take strips of beef, dried as described above, and pound them to
shreds between two hard stones. Put the shredded mass in a bowl, and
pour over it a little marrow fat from a boiled soup bone, or some melted
butter.


Corn Balls

The Hidatsas raised sweet corn for parching. Hunters often
carried a pouch of the parched grain for a lunch. Parched ripe sweet
corn was often pounded to a fine meal, kneaded with lumps of hot
roasted suet, and rolled between the palms into little lumps, or balls,
the size of one's thumb.

Hidatsa custom did not permit a woman to speak to her son-in-law;
but she often showed her love for him by making him a bowl of corn
balls.

[Footnote 1: Mä dä p[=o]´ zh[=e][=e] [=E][=e]k t[=e][=e]´ ä]

[Footnote 2: Mä´ nä kä pä]
-----File: 190.png---------------------------------------------------------




EDITOR'S NOTE


Surrounded by the powerful and hostile Sioux, the two little
Hidatsa tribes were compelled to keep relatively close to their stockaded
villages and cornfields, which, however, they most sturdily defended.
Their weakness proved a blessing. The yearly crops of their
cornfields were a sure protection against famine, and in their crowded
little villages was developed a culture that was remarkable. The
circular earth lodges of the Mandans and Hidatsas represent the highest
expression of the house-building art east of the Rocky Mountains.

Three members of Small Ankle's family are now living: Small
Ankle's son, Wolf Chief, his daughter, Waheenee, or Buffalo-Bird
Woman, and her son, Good Bird, or Goodbird. Goodbird was the
first Indian of his tribe to receive a common school education. Like
many Indians he has a natural taste for drawing. Several hundred
sketches by him, crude but spirited and in true perspective, await
publication by the Museum.

Goodbird's mother, Waheenee, is a marvelous source of information
of old-time life and belief. Conservative, and sighing for the good
old times, she is aware that the younger generation of Indians must
adopt civilized ways. Ignorant of English, she has a quick intelligence
and a memory that is marvelous. The stories in this book, out of her
own life, were told by her with other accounts of scientific interest for
the Museum. In the sweltering heat of an August day she has continued
dictation for nine hours, lying down but never flagging, when
too weary to sit longer in a chair. She is approximately 83 years old.

The stories in this book are true stories, typical of Indian life.
Many of them are exactly as they fell from Waheenee's lips. Others
have been completed from information given by Goodbird and Wolf
Chief, and in a few instances by other Indians. The aim has been not
to give a biography of Waheenee, but a series of stories illustrating
the philosophy, the indian-thinking[** Indian-thinking ?] of her life.

In story and picture, therefore, this book is true to fact and becomes
not only a reader of unusual interest but a contribution to the
literature of history and of anthropology. The author and the artist
have expressed and portrayed customs, places, and things that are
purely Indian and perfect in every detail.
-----File: 191.png---------------------------------------------------------




NED DAWSON
IN WILFUL LAND

BY

JAMES LEE ORR


A very fascinating realistic
story characteristic of boys,
written in allegorical style and
impressing a splendid moral lesson.
For libraries and supplementary
reading.


<i>Cloth, illustrated, 80 cents</i>


<sc>Webb Publishing Company</sc>

Saint Paul, Minn.
-----File: 192.png---------------------------------------------------------




/*
<sc>Rules of Order</sc>

FOR EVERY-DAY USE

<i>and</i>

<sc>Civil Government</sc>

MADE PLAIN

<i>HENRY SLADE GOFF</i>


Parliamentary Procedure Simplified
With a Graphic Explanation and Tabular
Illustration of Local, State and
National Institutions


<i>Cloth, 116 pages, 75 cents.</i>


WEBB PUBLISHING COMPANY

SAINT PAUL, MINN.
*/
