
-----File: 001.png---------------------------------------------------------




THE TOWER OF LONDON
-----File: 002.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 003.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 004.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>View of the Tower in the time of Charles <sc>I</sc>.</i>

(<i>From an etching by Hollar.</i>)]
-----File: 005.png---------------------------------------------------------




/*
THE

TOWER OF LONDON

BY
LORD RONALD SUTHERLAND GOWER, F.S.A.
ONE OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY

With Numerous Illustrations

IN TWO VOLUMES

VOL. II.

[Illustration]

LONDON
GEORGE BELL & SONS
1902
*/
-----File: 006.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 007.png---------------------------------------------------------




CONTENTS


/*
                                               PAGE
CHAPTER XII. THE STUARTS--JAMES I.      1

       XIII. CHARLES I. AND THE COMMONWEALTH      28

        XIV. CHARLES II.      56

         XV. JAMES II.      81

        XVI. WILLIAM AND MARY      91

       XVII. QUEEN ANNE      95

      XVIII. GEORGE I.      100

        XIX. GEORGE II.      114

         XX. GEORGE III.      136

        XXI. THE LATE REIGNS      142

             <sc>The Fire of 1841</sc>       142

             <sc>The Fenian Attempt to Blow up the White
               Tower, Jan. 24th, 1885</sc>      145

APPENDIX I.  DISPUTES BETWEEN THE CITY OF LONDON
               AND THE OFFICIALS OF THE
               TOWER AS TO THE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
               OF THE TOWER      151

APPENDIX II. THE BEHAVIOUR AND CHARACTER OF THE
               THREE HIGHLANDERS WHO WERE SHOT
               ON JULY <sc>18TH</sc>, 1743      155
*/
-----File: 008.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

APPENDIX III. DATES OF RESTORATIONS CARRIED ON BY
                H.M. OFFICE OF WORKS AT THE TOWER
                OF LONDON TO THE PRESENT TIME      169

APPENDIX  IV. RECENT DISCOVERIES AT THE TOWER
                (WITH A PLAN)      171

APPENDIX   V. THE BLOODY TOWER      175

APPENDIX  VI. STAINED GLASS IN THE TOWER      177

APPENDIX VII. LIST OF THE CONSTABLES OF THE TOWER      179

INDEX      183
*/
-----File: 009.png---------------------------------------------------------




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


/*
PHOTOGRAVURE PLATES
                                                          PAGE

View of the Tower in the time of Charles I. (From an etching
by Hollar)                                            <i>Frontispiece</i>

State Procession from the Tower in the days of the Stuarts      2

Arabella Stuart. (From a contemporary miniature)      12

Lady Arabella Stuart      14

The Earl and Countess of Somerset. (From a contemporary
print)      16

Sir Walter Raleigh      18

Execution of the Earl of Strafford, May 12th, 1641. (From
an etching by Hollar)      36

Archbishop Laud. (From an etching by Arnt Pieters)      40

London before the Great Fire. (From an etching by Hollar)      60

London after the Great Fire. (From an etching by Hollar)       62

The Tower in the time of Charles II. (From an etching by
Hollar)      64

Colonel Blood. (From a contemporary engraving)      66

William, Lord Russell. (From the portrait in the National
Portrait Gallery)      72

The Earl of Essex. (From an engraving by Picart after the
painting by Lely)      76

James, Duke of Monmouth. (From a contemporary engraving)      81

Execution of the Duke of Monmouth, July 1685      82

Portraits of James, Duke of Monmouth; Arthur, Earl of Essex;
William, Lord Russell; Archibald, Earl of Argyll; Colonel
Algernon Sidney; Sir Thomas Armstrong; Alderman Cornish;
and Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. (From an engraving by John
Savage)      84
*/
-----File: 010.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

The Seven Bishops. (From a contemporary print)      86

The Seven Bishops going by Water to the Tower      88

The Flight of James II.      90

View of the Tower in the time of James II.      92

View of the Tower during the command of Lord Lucas      94

St Peter's Chapel in the time of George II. (From an engraving
by Robert West)      96

View of the Tower in the time of George I.      100

The Earl of Derwentwater. (From a contemporary engraving)      104

North-west view of the Tower in 1753      114

Scotch Prisoners entering the Tower, 1742      116

Tower Hill at the time of the Execution of the Earl of Kilmarnock
and Lord Balmerino, 1746      122

View of Tower Hill and the place of Execution of the Rebel
Lords, 1746      124

Charles Ratcliffe. (From a contemporary print)      126

Execution of the Rebel Lords, 1746      128

North-west view of the Tower at the time of the Execution of
Lord Lovat, 1746      130

Execution of Lord Lovat, 1746      132

Waggons going into the Tower with Treasure taken from the
Spaniards (temp. George II.)      134

West Front of the Tower in the time of George III.      136

Entrance to the Tower Menagerie in the time of George III.      138

The Tower from Tower Hill in the time of George III.      140

The Fire at the Tower in 1841      142

Another View of the Fire in 1841      144

Breaking into the Strong Room in the "Jewel Tower" and
removal of the Regalia on the night of the Fire, Oct. 30,
1841. (From an etching by George Cruikshank)      146

The Great Court of the Tower, <i>circa</i> 1790      151

View of St Peter's Chapel in 1817      174
*/
-----File: 011.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*


BLOCKS

The Moat, looking West      6

The Byward Tower and Moat from the Wharf      8

Entrance to the Bloody Tower and Steps leading to Raleigh's
Walk      24

The Byward Tower      28

Vaulting in the Cradle Tower      54

Old Cannon and Mortars on the West Side of the White Tower      58

Gate and Portcullis in the Bloody Tower      76

The Beauchamp Tower      98

Window in the Cradle Tower      102

The Tower from Tower Hill      108

Middle Gate      112

The White Tower, showing the Exterior of St John's Chapel and
remains of the Roman Wall      172


PLAN showing Recent Discoveries in the Tower      170
*/
-----File: 012.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 013.png---------------------------------------------------------




THE TOWER




CHAPTER XII

THE STUARTS--JAMES I.


In Nichols's "Progresses," that mine of information regarding
James I., his court and times, it is related that
James paid his first visit to the Tower on 3rd May 1603,
"when His Majesty set forward from the Charter House
and went quietly on horseback to Whitehall where he
took barge. Having shot the bridge, his present landing
was expected at the Tower stayres, but it pleased His
Highness to passe the Towre stairs toward St Katherines,
and there stayed on the water to see the ordinance on
the White Tower (commonly called Julius Cæsar's Tower)
being in number twenty pieces, with the great ordinance
on the Towre wharfe, being in number 100, and chalmers
to the number of 130, discharged and shot off. Of which,
all services were sufficiently performed by the gunners,
that a peale of so good order was never heard before;
which was most commendable to all sorts, and very
acceptable to the King."[A]

[Footnote A: The Venetian envoy Scaramelli, writing to the Doge from London on the 15th May
1603, says, "Et fra tanto non entrera sua Maestà in Londra, ma solamente prenderá il
possesso della Torre ad uso antico, come del Trono et fondomento regale, essendovi in
essa il Tresoro, et le Armi, ciò è tutte le forze del regno," which translated is, "Meantime
his Majesty will not enter London, but will only take possession of the Tower,
according to ancient custom, as the Throne and the foundation of the royal power, for in
the Tower are the treasury and the armoury--that is, all the strength of the realm." Two
years later (on December 8th, 1605) Nicolo Molini, the Venetian Ambassador in England,
writes to Venice about the Tower, "It is a most remarkable fact in this country, that
if a nobleman is put in the Tower, he either loses his life or ends his days there." I am
indebted to my friend, Mr Horatio F. Brown, for these two interesting notices which he
found in the Venetian State Paper Records.]
-----File: 014.png---------------------------------------------------------

Owing to the plague then raging in London, the
customary procession at the coronation was omitted,
although the King rode in state from the Tower to
Westminster, preparatory to the opening of his first
Parliament on 15th of March 1605, as the Londoners
had made their welcome for him ready. In Mr Sidney
Lee's "Life of Shakespeare," he states that Shakespeare,
with eight other players of the King's company of actors,
"walked from the Tower of London to Westminster in
the procession which accompanied the King in his formal
entry into London. Each actor received four and a half
yards of scarlet cloth to wear as a cloak on the occasion,
and in the document authorising the grant, Shakespeare's
name stands first on the list." This is the only time that
we can positively know that Shakespeare was ever at the
Tower; but his frequent introduction of the fortress into his
historical dramas makes it certain that he must often have
visited a place so full of dramatic episodes and historical
memories.[A]

Four months earlier, while staying at Wilton, news
had reached James of a plot to place the crown upon the
head of Lady Arabella Stuart, and a large batch of alleged
conspirators were taken to the Tower in consequence.
Among them was Sir Walter Raleigh, Lord Cobham,
and his brother, George Brooke, Thomas Lord Grey

[Footnote A: Among the contemporary dramatists of Shakespeare, reference to the Tower is made
by Peele, Decker, Webster, and Heywood. Peele, in his play of "Edward I.," where
Llewellyn, Prince of Wales, mentions how his father broke his neck in attempting to
escape from what he calls "Julius Cæsar's Tower." Decker and Webster refer to the
fortress in their "Famous History of Sir Thomas Wyatt," and to Guildford Dudley and
Jane Grey; Heywood, in his tragedy of "Edward IV.," recounts the murders of Clarence
and the sons of Edward, and refers to Queen Elizabeth's imprisonment in the Tower in
his "History of Queen Elizabeth." There are also allusions to the Tower and to
Cromwell, Earl of Essex, and to Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, in the "Doubtful
Plays." The above information I have obtained from that rare scholar and critic,
Dr Furnival. Probably scattered about the country are many other inscriptions recording
the connection with the Tower of the dead, commemorated as was Sir Edward
Walsingham on his tomb by his son Sir Thomas, in the church of St Nicholas at
Chislehurst in Kent:

/*
"A knight, sometime of worthie fame,
Lyeth buried under this stonie bower;
Sir Edmund Walsingham was his name,
Lieutenant he was of London Tower."
*/
]
-----File: 015.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>State Procession from the Tower in the days of the Stuarts.</i>[** F1 2 x images]]
-----File: 016.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 017.png---------------------------------------------------------
de Wilton, Sir Griffin Maskham, Sir Edward Parham,
Bartholomew Brookesby, Anthony Copley, and two priests
named Weston and Clarke. This conspiracy, if it deserves
the name, and for which Raleigh was for the second
time sent to the Tower, owed its existence to the unlucky
Arabella, daughter of Charles Stuart, Earl of Lennox,
younger brother of Darnley, and consequently James's
first cousin on the mother's side.

Arabella Stuart was also related to the Tudors, and
this double relationship to the reigning sovereign and
to the late Queen was her greatest misfortune, and the
cause of her untimely death. She appears to have been
amiable, refined, virtuous, and good-looking, but of a
somewhat frail physique and countenance, to judge by
the excellent miniature which Oliver painted of her. That
her mind was not a strong one is very evident, and one
cannot be surprised that she became insane under the
burden of her misfortunes.

Lady Arabella was made use of as a tool by James's
enemies, and at Lord Cobham's trial it was conclusively
proved that she had no share in any of the schemes which
had the placing of herself on the throne for their object.
Had it not been for her unfortunate marriage she
would probably have ended her life in peaceful obscurity.
This unhappy lady disliked the life of a court, and had
lived principally with her grandmother, old Lady Shrewsbury,
"Bess of Hardwicke," as that much-married and
firm-minded dame was nicknamed, in her beautiful homes
of Chatsworth and Hardwicke Hall, in Derbyshire. In
the last year of Elizabeth's reign, Arabella, whose hand
had been asked in marriage by many suitors, and amongst
them by Henry IV. of France, and the Archduke Mathias,
met, and fell in love with William Seymour, grandson
of the Earl of Hertford, and had been kept in close
confinement by the Queen in consequence.

The plot to place Lady Arabella on the throne was
regarded as dangerous by the court, owing to James's
-----File: 018.png---------------------------------------------------------
unpopularity, which was not surprising, for at that time
everything Scottish was cordially detested by the English.
The Scotch had been as inimical to us as either the
French or the Spaniards, and for a far longer period,
whilst the Scottish alliance with France had added still
more to the national dislike. Neither was the new King's
appearance one to win the admiration of his new subjects,
for a more ungainly individual had surely never appeared
out of a booth at a fair. The English were as susceptible
then, as they are now, to the outward appearance of their
rulers, and even Henry VIII., for all his tyranny and
cruelty, was popular among the people on account of
his fine presence; and when Elizabeth appeared in public,
all aglow with splendour, her lieges shouted themselves
hoarse with delight, and worshipped that "bright occidental
effulgence." What a contrast to these was James Stuart.
With his huge head, and padded shanks, his great tongue
lolling from out his mouth, his goggle eyes, and rolling
gait, and the incomprehensible, to English ears, jargon
of Lowland Scotch which he spoke, his was not a very
kingly figure, and he made anything but a favourable
impression upon his new subjects. It appears that Raleigh,
at the time of James's arrival, let fall some remarks which
were repeated to the King, to the effect that it would
be well not to allow the Scottish locusts to eat too much of
the Southern pastures. It has been supposed that Raleigh,
at a meeting at Whitehall, proposed to found a republic,
and Aubrey, a contemporary writer, even gives his words,
"Let us keep the staff in our own hands, and set up a
commonwealth, and not remain subject to a needy beggarly
nation." Raleigh met the King for the first time at
Burleigh, when James, who prided himself on his wit,
said to Sir Walter, that he thought but "rawly" of him;
it is a vile pun, but is interesting as showing the way in
which his contemporaries pronounced Raleigh's name.

Cecil, who had brought Essex to the scaffold, now
lost no time in bringing Raleigh, Essex's rival, to the
-----File: 019.png---------------------------------------------------------
Tower, and on the 20th of July 1603, the prison gates
of that fortress once again closed upon the founder of
Virginia, on a charge of treason, based on the Arabella
Stuart conspiracy, nor did they open for him until twelve
years had passed. On the following day Raleigh attempted
to stab himself with a table-knife, for he seems to have
been maddened by his treatment by James and Cecil.
In November the plague was so violent in London, that
the Law Courts were transferred to Winchester, and it
was to that city that Sir Walter and his fellow-prisoners
were taken and tried on a charge of "attempting to deprive
the King of his crown and dignity; to molest the Government,
and alter the true religion established in England,
and to levy war against the King."

George Brooke, a brother of Lord Cobham's, and two
priests were found guilty and executed, Lords Grey de
Wilton, Cobham, and Raleigh were respited, and were
taken back to their prison in the Tower. Cobham never
regained his liberty, he was a ruined man, and died probably
in the Tower. The place of his burial is unknown.

The de Cobhams were an early family of importance
in the twelfth century, and from the thirteenth to the
sixteenth one of the most powerful in the south of England.
Henry de Cobham was summoned to Parliament in 1313.
The direct line ended in Joan de Cobham, who married
five times; her third husband was Sir John Oldcastle,
commonly called Lord Cobham, <i>jure uxoris</i>, but inaccurately,
for he was summoned to Parliament under his own
name, Oldcastle.

In descent from Joan was Henry Brooke, Lord
Cobham, attainted first of James the First. He was born
1564, and succeeded to the title 1596-7, and shortly after
installed Knight of the Garter. He married Francis
Howard, daughter of the Earl of Nottingham, and widow
of the Earl of Kildare. He was committed to the Tower
December 16th, 1603, tried, and condemned to death,
and actually brought out to be executed, but had been
-----File: 020.png---------------------------------------------------------
privately reprieved beforehand by James the First, who
played with Cobham and Gray, and their companions, as
a cat would with mice. After fifteen years' rigorous confinement
in the Tower, his health failed, and he was
allowed out, attended by his gaolers, to visit Bath. This
was in 1617, and was taken so ill on his way back he
had to stay at Odiham, Hants, at the house of his brother-in-law,
Sir Edward Moore. He died, with very little
doubt, in the Tower, January 24th, 1619, but the place of
his burial has been undiscovered. He had been well
supplied with books, for the Lieutenant of the Tower
seized a thousand volumes at the time of his death of "all
learning and languages." In a letter from Sir Thomas
Wynne to Sir Dudley Carlton (State Papers, Dom Jac,
1st vol., 105), 28th of January 1619, occurs this passage:
"My Lord Cobham is dead, and lyeth unburied as yet
for want of money; he died a papist." This probably
was only gossip. While in the Tower he was allowed
eight pounds a week for maintenance, but very little of
this ever reached him, it probably was absorbed by his
keepers and the Lieutenant. During his long imprisonment
Lady Kildare never troubled herself further about
him. She lived comfortably, first at Cobham, and afterwards
at Copthall, Essex.

By the will of George, Lord Cobham, 1552, the Cobham
estates, by an elaborate settlement, were strictly
entailed, so that Henry, Lord Cobham, only had a life
interest, and the King could not seize them; and probably
it was to that fact he owed his life, for the King
could possess them during his life, but not alienate them.

Unfortunately, the next heir was the son of George
Brooke, executed for treason at Winchester, Lord Cobham's
brother, who, at the time of his uncle's death, was
an infant of tender age, and without friends, so negotiations
were carried on with the next in succession, Duke Brooke,
a cousin of Lord Cobham's, and this man parted with his
prospective rights to the King for about £10,000, which
-----File: 021.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Moat looking West</i>]
-----File: 022.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 023.png---------------------------------------------------------
enabled this "specimen of King craft" to enter into
possession. Duke Brooke, dying soon after, Charles
Brooke, his brother, parted with several other manors to
Cecil, Earl of Salisbury. None of these transactions were
legal; Henry, Lord Cobham, was not dead, nor the children
of George Brooke, William, and his two sisters, Frances
and Elizabeth. For some reason they were "restored in
blood," but with the express proviso they should not inherit
any of the property of their fathers or their uncles; nor
was William to take the title of Lord Cobham. And this
was all done with the connivance of Cecil, Lord Burleigh,
brother-in-law to Henry, Lord Cobham. No wonder
William Brooke became a devoted Parliamentarian in
the next reign, and died fighting against the King at
Newbury, 1643. Many letters of Henry Brooke have
been preserved while in the Tower: "To my very good
Lord and Brother-in-law, Lord Burleigh." He must both
have been clever and learned, for during his captivity
he translated Seneca's treatises, <i>De Providentia, De Ira,
De Tranquilitate, De Vita Beata, and De Paupertate</i>:
the original manuscript of one, <i>De Providentia</i>, is in the
library at Ufford Place, Suffolk, the seat of his representative,
Edward Brooke, Esq., written in a beautifully fine
hand. Raleigh and Cobham's "treason" was that known
as the Main or Spanish Treason, one of the supposed
objects of which was to place the Lady Arabella Stuart
on the throne.

Lord Grey de Wilton, a young man of great promise,
died in St Thomas's Tower in 1617, after passing nine
years in the Brick Tower. Lord Grey had made an eloquent
defence during his trial, which lasted from eight in
the morning until eight at night, during which, according to
the Hardwicke State Papers, many "subtle traverses and
escapes," took place. When Grey was asked why judgment
of death should not be passed against him, he replied,
"I have nothing to say." Then he paused a little, and
added, "And yet a word of Tacitus comes into my mind,
-----File: 024.png---------------------------------------------------------
'non eadem omnibus decora,' the house of the Wiltons
have spent many lives in their Princes' service and Grey
cannot beg his."

For the next twelve years the Tower was Raleigh's
home, and not till he had succeeded in bribing King
James's favourite, George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham,
by the payment of a large sum of money, did he again
obtain his liberty. Before settling down in the Tower, and
while the plague was still raging, Raleigh, with his wife
and son, were taken to the Fleet Prison on several occasions.
At length they were placed in the not uncomfortable rooms
in the Bloody Tower, which he, with his family and
servants, must have quite filled, for besides Lady Raleigh
and her son Carew, there were two servants named Dean
and Talbot, and a boy, who was probably a son of Talbot's.
Their imprisonment was not absolutely rigid, for they were
allowed the visits of a clergyman named Hawthorne, a
doctor, Turner, and a surgeon, Dr John, as well as those
of Sir Walter's agent, who came up from Raleigh's place,
Sherborn, so that he was kept in touch with his affairs;
one or two other friends were also admitted. In addition
to these privileges Sir Walter was allowed the run--the
liberty as it would be called then--of the Lieutenant of
the Tower's garden, which lay at the foot of the Bloody
Tower, as has already been mentioned in the description
of that place.

In 1604 the penal laws against the Roman Catholics
were re-enacted by Parliament, and in the following year
the famous Gunpowder Plot was discovered, with the
consequence that in the month of November of that year
the Tower received many of the principal conspirators, and
still more of those individuals who were in some way or
other concerned in it. Foremost amongst the latter were
the aged Earl of Northumberland, Henry Percy, and with
him were Henry, Lord Mordaunt, Lord Stourton, and three
Jesuit priests, Fathers Garnet, Oldcorn, and Gerrard.
Northumberland, besides having to pay an enormous fine,
-----File: 025.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Byward Tower and Moat from the Wharf</i>]
-----File: 026.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 027.png---------------------------------------------------------
was kept a prisoner in the Tower for sixteen years;
Mordaunt and Stourton were also heavily fined and remanded
to the fortress during the King's pleasure;
Fathers Garnet and Oldcorn were hanged--the former at
St Paul's, in the usual manner, after being cruelly tortured,
the latter at Worcester. As for the third priest, Gerrard,
I have in another part of this work described the treatment
he endured and his escape from the Tower.

Of the active conspirators, besides Guy Fawkes--who
was executed with Thomas Winter, Rookwood, and Keyes
in Old Palace Yard--Sir Everard Digby, the father of the
accomplished Sir Kenelm, Robert Winter, Grant, and
Bates, were drawn on hurdles to the west end of St Paul's
Churchyard, where they were done to death in the approved
fashion of execution for high treason.

Guy Fawkes and most of his fellow-prisoners while in
the Tower had been placed in the subterranean dungeons
beneath the White Tower. Fawkes, besides being tortured
by the rack, was placed in "Little Ease," in which horrible
hole he is supposed to have been kept for fifty days.
Father Oldcorn was imprisoned in the lower room of the
Bloody Tower, whilst Father Fisher was in the White
Tower; Northumberland, the "Wizard Earl," as he was
called on account of his leaning towards chemical experiments,
was lodged in the Martin Tower.

Until the month of August in that year (1605), Sir
Walter Raleigh's imprisonment in the Bloody Tower had
not been very stringent. Sir George Harvey had filled
the position of Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir George
and Sir Walter were on friendly terms. His lodging, for
a prison, was comfortable enough; his wife and son were
still with him, Lady Raleigh having been confined of a
second son about this time. In addition to the attendance
of his servants and the visits of his friends, as I have
mentioned before, he was allowed to have all the books
he required for the great literary labour that now began
to occupy much of his time. When not working in his
-----File: 028.png---------------------------------------------------------
little garden by the Tower, or experimenting with his
chemicals and decoctions in a small outbuilding which he
had built in the garden, or taking exercise on the wall
terrace which overlooked the wharf and the river beyond,
he would be writing at his "History of the World," that
wonderful fragment which is one of the marvels of our
literature.

Unfortunately for Sir Walter, his friend Sir George
Harvey, with whom he often dined and passed the
evening, ceased being Lieutenant at this time, being
succeeded by Sir William Waad. Raleigh's feelings
towards the new Lieutenant appear to have resembled
those of Napoleon to Sir Hudson Lowe. Waad, who
had been Clerk of the Council, on his side seems to have
had a personal dislike to the great captive over whom he
was placed in charge, and to have done all he could--and
he had the power of doing a great deal--to render Raleigh's
life as unpleasant and galling as possible. For instance,
Waad ordered a brick wall to be built in front of the
terrace where Raleigh walked, so that the captive could
no longer watch the passing life beneath him on the wharf
or river. Then Waad complained to Cecil of Raleigh
making himself too conspicuous to the people who passed
beneath the Bloody Tower, and, not content with annoying
Sir Walter, pestered Lady Raleigh, and deprived her of
the poor satisfaction of driving her coach into the courtyard
of the fortress, a privilege that had hitherto been
allowed her. In these and many other petty ways the
new Lieutenant contrived to make himself as unpleasant
as he possibly could to Raleigh and his wife.

During the alarm consequent upon the Gunpowder
Plot, Raleigh was examined by the Council, probably in
the Lieutenant's, now the King's House, but naturally
nothing could be found to implicate him with the conspiracy,
and the King had to bide his time before he
could bring his great subject to the block. In 1610, for
some unknown reason, Sir Walter was kept a close
-----File: 029.png---------------------------------------------------------
prisoner in his tower for three months, and Lady Raleigh
was taken from him.

In Disraeli's "Amenities of Literature" is the following
interesting description of those friends of Sir Walter who
shared his pursuits and studies in the Tower:--

/#
"A circumstance as remarkable as the work itself" ("History of the
World") "occurred in the author's long imprisonment. By one of the
strange coincidences in human affairs, it happened that in the Tower
Raleigh was surrounded by the highest literary and scientific circle in the
nation. Henry, the ninth Earl of Northumberland, on the suspicion of
having favoured his relation Piercy, the Gunpowder Plot conspirator, was
cast into this State prison, and confined during many years. This Earl
delighted in what Anthony Wood describes as 'the obscure parts of
learning.' He was a magnificent Mecaenas, and not only pensioned
scientific men, but daily assembled them at his table, and in these intellectual
communions, participating in their pursuits, he passed his life.
His learned society was designated as 'the Atlantis of the Northumberland
world'! But that world had other inhabitants, antiquaries and astrologers,
chemists and naturalists. There was seen Thomas Allen, another Roger
Bacon, 'terrible and tho' vulgar,' famed for his 'Bibliotheca Alleniana,' a
rich collection of manuscripts, most of which have been preserved in the
Bodleian; the name of Allen survives in the ardent commemorations of
Camden, of Spelman, and of Selden. He was accompanied by his friend
Doctor Dee, but whether Dee ever tried their patience or their wonder by
his 'Diary of Conferences with Spirits' we find no record, and by the
astronomical Torporley, a disciple of Lucretius, for his philosophy consisted
of stones; several of his manuscripts remain in Sion College. The muster-*roll
is too long to run over. In this galaxy of the learned the brightest
star was Thomas Hariot, who merited the distinction of being 'the
Universal Philosopher'; his inventions in algebra Descarte, when in
England, silently adopted, but which Dr Wallis afterwards indignantly
reclaimed; his skill in interpreting the text of Homer excited the grateful
admiration of Chalman when occupied by his version. Bishop Corbet
has described

/*
'Deep Hariot's mine
In which there is no dross.'
*/

"Two other men, Walter Warner, who is said to have suggested to
Harvey the great discovery of the circulation of the blood, and Robert
Huer, famed for his 'Treatise on the Globes'--these, with Hariot, were
the Earl's constant companions; and at a period when science seemed
connected with necromancy, the world distinguished the Earl and his three
friends as 'Henry the Wizard and his three Magi.'... Such were the
men of science, daily guests in the Tower during the imprisonment of
#/
-----File: 030.png---------------------------------------------------------
/#
Raleigh; and when he had constructed his laboratory to pursue his
chemical experiments, he must have multiplied their wonders. With one
he had been intimately connected early in life, Hariot had been his
mathematical tutor, was domesticated in his house, and became his
confidential agent in the expedition to Virginia. Raleigh had warmly
recommended his friend to the Earl of Northumberland, and Sion House
became Hariot's home and observatory."
#/

The elder Disraeli has argued that Raleigh could not
possibly have written the whole of that large tome, "The
History of the World," himself, for want of books of
reference whilst in the Tower. But as his friends supplied
him with books, and he himself had probably taken
copious notes for the work while living in the old home of
the Desmonds at Youghal, in Ireland, where a remnant of
the old Desmond library is still existing, the argument can
scarcely be considered proved. The late Sir John Pope
Hennessy has pointed out in his work on "Raleigh in
Ireland," that, by an odd coincidence, the son of the sixteenth
Earl of Desmond, whose lands Raleigh held in
Ireland, was a fellow-prisoner of Sir Walter's in the Tower
during his first imprisonment in the fortress during Elizabeth's
reign. Desmond died in prison in 1608, and was
buried in St Peter's Chapel. Raleigh had this youth's
sad fate in his mind, it seems, when he wrote from the
Tower, "Wee shall be judged as we judge--and be dealt
withal as wee deal with others in this life, if wee believe
God Himself."

An almost contemporary historian, Sir Richard Baker,
refers to Raleigh's imprisonment in the following quaint
manner:--"He was kept in the Tower, where he had
great honour; he spent his time in writing, and had been
a happy man if he had never been released." A strange
description, surely, of what is generally understood by
the term, "happy man."

Henry, Prince of Wales, seems to have been the only
member of his family who appreciated Sir Walter, frequently
visiting him at the Tower. On one of the occasions
when he had left him, the young prince remarked to
-----File: 031.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Arabella Stuart.</i>

(<i>From a Contemporary Miniature.</i>)]
-----File: 032.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 033.png---------------------------------------------------------
one of his following that no king except his father could
keep such a bird in such a cage. The Prince's mother,
Queen Anne, seems also to have shown some interest in
Raleigh's fate, and to have tried to induce her miserable
husband to set him free.

In 1611 Arabella Stuart was brought a prisoner into the
Tower, and with her, Lady Shrewsbury. When the news
of Arabella's marriage with young William Seymour
reached the King, her fate was sealed, for by this marriage
the half-captivity in which she had lived was changed into
captivity for life; and few of James the First's evil actions,
and they were not a few, were more mean or cowardly
than his treatment of his poor kinswoman, Arabella
Hertford.

She had never been known to mix in politics, and if she
had any ambition, it was the noble ambition of wishing to
lead a pure life away from an infamous court. Poor
Arabella used to declare that although she was often asked
to marry some foreign prince, nothing on earth would
induce her to marry any man whom she did not know, or
for whom she had no liking.

At Christmastide of 1609, James, hearing a rumour that
seemed to point to Arabella being married to some foreign
prince, had sent her to the Tower, releasing her when he
discovered that his fears were groundless, and giving his
consent to her marrying one of his subjects should she
wish to do so. Unfortunately, Arabella took advantage of
the King's consent, trusting to his word, but she found to
her bitter cost how hollow and false that promise was.
In the following February (1610) she plighted her troth
to William Seymour, both probably relying upon the Royal
word. Whether James had forgotten that Seymour was
a probable suitor for Arabella's hand when he gave his
promise cannot be known, but Arabella could not have
made a more unlucky choice, as far as she herself was
concerned, for the Suffolk claims had been recognised
by Act of Parliament; and the same Parliament which
-----File: 034.png---------------------------------------------------------
had acknowledged James the First could not alter the
order of succession, and, consequently, William Seymour
being the grandson of Lord Hertford, by his wife, Catharine
Grey, was in what was called the "Suffolk Succession."
His marriage to Arabella brought her still nearer to the
Crown, and any children born of the marriage would have
had a good chance of succeeding to the throne.

The young couple were summoned to appear before the
Council, and were charged to give up all thoughts of
marriage. But, in spite of King and Council, they were
secretly married in the month of May 1611--a month
said to be unlucky for marriages. Two months afterwards
the news reached the King, and the storm burst over the
unlucky lovers. Arabella was sent a prisoner to Lambeth
Palace, and her husband to the Tower. From Lambeth
Arabella was first removed to the house of Mr Conyers
at Highgate, and thence she was to be sent to Durham
Castle in charge of the Bishop. At Highgate, however,
she fell ill, or pretended to fall ill, and the famous attempt
made to escape by herself and her husband took place.

By some means she procured a disguise in the shape
of a wig and male attire, with long, yellow riding-boots
and a rapier, and thus accoutred, on the 4th of June she
rode to Blackwall, where she had hoped to find her
husband, but, failing in this, she rowed with a female
attendant and a Mr Markham, who had accompanied her
from Highgate, to a French vessel lying near Leigh,
which took them on board. Seymour, also disguised,
escaped from the Tower by following a cart laden with
wooden billets. He got away unperceived, and managed
to reach a boat waiting for him by the wharf at the Iron
Gate, but, on arriving at Leigh, they found the French
ship, with Arabella on board, had put out to sea. The
weather was against the ship in which Seymour was
sailing making Calais, and he had to go on to Ostend,
where he disembarked.

Meanwhile, a hue and cry rang out from London.
-----File: 035.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Lady Arabella  Seymour.

/#
Sweet brother

every one forsakes me but
those that cannot helpe me.
Your most unfortunate sister

/*
Arbella Seymaure
*/
#/

<i>Her Autograph from the Original in the Possession of</i> John Thane.]
-----File: 036.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 037.png---------------------------------------------------------
King's messengers galloped in hot haste from Whitehall
to Deptford, and orders arrived at all the southern ports
to search all ships and barks that might contain the
runaways; a proclamation was issued to arrest the principals
and the abettors of their flight. A ship of war
was sent over to Calais, and others were despatched along
the French coast as far as Flanders to intercept the
fugitives. When half-way across the Channel, one of
these vessels, named the <i>Adventurer</i>, came in sight of
a ship crowding on all sail in order to reach Calais; the
wind, meanwhile, had dropped, and further flight was
impossible. A boat was lowered from the <i>Adventurer</i>,
the crew who manned it being armed to the teeth. A
few shots were exchanged, and the flying vessel, which
proved to be French, was boarded, and the poor runaway
was taken back to the English man-of-war; on board of
her Arabella was made a prisoner, and as a prisoner was
landed at the Tower, never to leave it again until her
luckless body was taken from it for burial at Westminster.

James made as much ado about this attempted escape
of the Hertfords as if he had discovered a second Gunpowder
Plot. And not only did he have all those who
had been concerned in Arabella's flight seized and imprisoned
in the Tower, but kept the Countess of Shrewsbury
and the Earl strict prisoners in their house, and
ordered the old Earl of Hertford to appear before him.

From all appearances William Seymour showed a lack
of courage at this time, not unlike the husband of Lady
Catherine Seymour in the last reign, for he remained abroad
while the storm with all its fury fell and crushed his young
wife. Poor Arabella lingered on in her prison till death released
her from her troubles on the 25th of September 1615.
She had been kept both in the Belfry Tower and in the
Lieutenant's House, but had lost her reason some time
previous to her final release both from durance and the
world. Her body was taken in the dead of night to
Westminster Abbey, and placed below the coffin of Mary
-----File: 038.png---------------------------------------------------------
Queen of Scots. Mickle, the author of "Cumnor Hall,"
and "There's nae luck about the house," is credited with
having written the touching ballad on Arabella Stuart,
which is included in Evans's "Old Ballads."

/*
"Where London's Tower its turrets shew,
So stately by old Thames's side,
Fair Arabella, child of woe,
For many a day had sat and sighed.
And as she heard the waves arise,
And as she heard the black wind roar,
As fast did heave her heartfelt sighs,
And still so fast her tears did pour."
*/

William Seymour survived Arabella for nearly half-a-century;
he married again, his second wife being a sister
of the Parliamentary general, the Earl of Essex, the
son of Elizabeth's favourite and victim. In 1660 Seymour
became Duke of Somerset, and lived just long enough
to welcome Charles II. He had shown far more loyalty
to Charles I. than he had done to poor Arabella Stuart.

In 1613, Sir William Waad, to the great delight of
Raleigh, as well as of the other prisoners in the Tower,
vacated his post as Lieutenant. He had been charged
with the theft of the unfortunate Arabella's jewels, but his
dismissal was also connected with a still more tragic story--the
murder of Sir Thomas Overbury--a murder which
throws a very lurid light upon the doings of James the
First's court and courtiers. Two years before Arabella's
death, the Tower had been the scene of a most foul
murder. Scandalous as was the court of James, murder
had not yet been associated with it, but in the year 1613
the fate of Sir Thomas Overbury added that dark crime
to its other villainies.

Macaulay has compared the court of James the First
to that of Nero; it would have been more correct to have
likened it to that of the Valois, Henry III. Although it
was never proved, there were strong suspicions that the
somewhat sudden death of Henry, Prince of Wales, was
-----File: 039.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

/#
<i>The portraiture[**P3 portracture ?] of Robert Car[**P2: Carr?] Earle of Somerset, Vicount Rochester, Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter &. And of the Ladie Francis his wife</i>
#/

<i>The Earl & Countess of Somerset.</i>

(<i>From a Contemporary Print.</i>)]
-----File: 040.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 041.png---------------------------------------------------------
brought about by poison, and there is no doubt that poison
was made use of by James's courtiers, as the death of
Overbury proves. Sir Thomas Overbury was the confidant
of the King's worthless favourite, Robert Carr, a handsome
youth who had been brought by James from Scotland in
his train, and whom he had knighted in 1607. James had
also given Raleigh's confiscated estates to his favourite two
years after making him a knight, and in 1614 created him
Lord Rochester and Earl of Somerset, as well as Lord
Chamberlain. Overbury belonged to a Gloucestershire
family, and had travelled on the Continent, whence he
returned what was then called "a finished gentleman."
Overbury and Carr were firm friends, and it was probably
on the recommendation of the latter that James knighted
Overbury in 1608. When, however, Somerset determined
to marry the notoriously improper Lady Frances Howard,
the daughter of the Earl of Suffolk, and the girl-wife of
Lord Essex, from whom she was separated, Overbury most
strongly persuaded his friend from committing such a rash
action. His attitude coming to the knowledge of Lady
Frances, she vowed to avenge herself upon Sir Thomas,
and carried her threat to its bitter execution. On some
frivolous pretext Overbury was sent to the Tower; Lady
Somerset, as Lady Frances had become, notwithstanding
Overbury's advice, now determined to rid herself of the
man she mostly feared. With the help of a notorious
quack, and of a procuress, Mrs Turner, with whom she had
been brought up, she set about the task of consummating
her revenge. Poison was supplied by Mrs Turner, with
which the unfortunate Overbury was slowly killed; but as
the drug--it is believed to have been corrosive sublimate--did
not act sufficiently quickly, two hired assassins, named
Franklin and Lobell, were called in, and stifled the victim
with a pillow. Sir William Waad at this time had ceased
to be the Lieutenant, through Lady Essex's influence, and
had been succeeded by Sir Gervase Elwes, a creature of
Somerset's, who was not only cognisant of Overbury's
-----File: 042.png---------------------------------------------------------
death in the Bloody Tower, where he was confined, but
even aided Lady Somerset in her crime. Mrs Turner
was the inventor of a peculiar yellow starch which was
used for stiffening the ruffs worn at that time; she wore
one of these ruffs when she was sentenced to die for her
participation in this murder by the Chief-Justice, Sir
Edward Coke, and was also hanged in it at Tyburn in
March 1615, with the natural consequence that yellow
starched ruffs suddenly ceased to be the fashion. Lady
Somerset was also tried, and although found guilty of
Overbury's murder, received a pardon from the King, but
she and her husband, Somerset, spent six years as prisoners
in the Tower, where they occupied the same rooms in the
Bloody Tower which shortly before had been tenanted by
the wife's victim. Sir Thomas Overbury was buried in
St Peter's Chapel, his grave lying next to that of Robert
Devereux, Earl of Essex.

Prince Henry's death in 1612 was a terrible loss to
Raleigh. The Queen had already tasted Sir Walter's
famous cordial or elixir, and when her son was given up
by the physicians, Anne implored them to try Raleigh's
specific medicine, which, according to its inventor, was safe
to cure all diseases save those produced by poison. Henry
was already speechless when the elixir was administered
to him, but after he had swallowed one or two drops he
was able to utter a few words before he expired. What
was the nature of this wonderful mixture of Raleigh's
cannot now be ascertained, although Charles II.'s
French physician, Le Febre, prepared what was believed
to be the actual concoction and wrote a treatise upon it.
Some of its ingredients were indeed awful, the flesh of
vipers forming one of them, and it speaks much for the
strength of James's Queen that she survived the taking
of this terrible physic.

Raleigh had intended dedicating his history to Prince
Henry, but after that young Prince's death he seems to
have lost his former zest in the work. There is a story
-----File: 043.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: VERA EFFIGIES CLARISS^{MI} VIRI DOM^{NI} GUALTHERI RALEGH EQV AUR. [**P2: er? unclear|P3 etc ?/F1 erc, and possibly continued in same font before "VERA" but unclear on TIA]

AMORE ET VIRTVTE

<i>The true and lively portraiture
of the honourable and learned Knight
S^r. Walter Ralegh.</i>][** F1 all text within image, plus coat of arms mid-italic text]
-----File: 044.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 045.png---------------------------------------------------------
told that he threw part of the manuscript into the fire on
hearing that Walter Burr, the publisher of the first edition
in 1614, had been a loser by bringing it out. Of that first
part Mr Hume, in his "Life of Raleigh," writes, "The
history, as it exists, is probably the greatest work ever
produced in captivity, except Don Quixote. The learning
contained in it is perfectly encyclopædic. Raleigh had
always been a lover and a collector of books, and had
doubtless laid out the plan of the work in his mind before
his fall. He had near him in the Tower his learned
Hariot, who was indefatigable in helping his master. Ben
Jonson boasted that he had contributed to the work, and
such books or knowledge as could not be obtained or
consulted by a prisoner, were made available by scholars
like Robert Burhill, by Hughes, Warner, or Hariot. Sir
John Hoskyns, a great stylist in his day, would advise
with regard to construction, and from many other quarters
aid of various sorts was obtained. But, withal, the work
is purely Raleigh's. No student of his fine, flowing,
majestic style will admit that any other pen but his can
have produced it. The vast learning employed in it is
now, for the most part, obsolete, but the human asides
where Raleigh's personality reveals itself, the little bits of
incidental autobiography, the witty, apt illustrations, will
prevent the work itself from dying. To judge from a
remark in the preface, the author intended at a later stage
to concentrate his history with that mainly of his own
country, and it would seem that the portion of the book
published was to a great extent introductory. Great as
were his powers and self-confidence, it must have been
obvious to him that it would have been impossible for a
man of his age (he was in his sixtieth year when he began
the work) to complete a history of the whole world on the
same scale, the first six books published reaching from the
beginning of the world to the end of the second Macedonian
war. In[**P1: "?/P2: quote begins earlier] any case," adds Mr Hume, "the book will ever
remain a noble fragment of a design, which could only have
-----File: 046.png---------------------------------------------------------
been conceived by a master-mind." And who, recalling
those mighty lines on death with which Raleigh bids
farewell to his great work, but will agree with the above
admirable criticism of the work?

"O Eloquent, just and mighty Death! whom none
could advise thou hast persuaded: what now none hath
dared thou hast done; and whom the world hath flattered,
thou only hast cast out of the world and despised: thou
hast drawn together all the far-stretched greatness, all the
pride, cruelty, ambition of man, and covered it over with
these two narrow words: 'Hic Jacet.'" How noble, too,
are the introductory lines to Ben Jonson, wherein he
commends the serious study of history:

/*
"... that nor the good might be defrauded, nor the great so cured;
But both might know their ways are understood,
And the reward and punishment assured."
*/

No wonder that James disapproved of such sentiments
and said of the "History," "it is too saucy in censuring
the acts of princes."

To Raleigh, more than to any other of the great
Elizabethan heroes, does England owe her mighty earth-embracing
dominion. Sir Walter never ceased to urge
the expansion of the empire, nor wearied in his efforts
to make the English fleet the foremost in all the seas,
not only as a check to Spain, but in order that the
colonial possessions of the kingdom might be increased;
and he, more than any of our great soldier-statesmen
deserved those noble lines of Milton: "Those who of
thy free Grace didst build up this Brittanick Empire to
a glorious and enviable height, with all her daughter
islands about her, stay us in this felicitie."

In 1616 Raleigh was allowed to leave the fortress,
but, as I have said before, in order to obtain his liberty
he had been obliged to bribe George Villiers and his
brother, who had roused James's cupidity by persuading
him that if Raleigh were allowed to lead a fresh expedi-*
-----File: 047.png---------------------------------------------------------
*tion to the West Indies, he might return with a great
treasure of which James would take the lion's share. A
warrant, dated the 19th of March of this year, was drawn
up, giving Raleigh permission to go abroad in order
that he might make the necessary arrangements for his
voyage. The twelve years of imprisonment had sadly
marred and aged the gallant knight, but his spirit was
as bold and courageous as ever, and he employed the
first days of his liberty in revisiting his old London
haunts; many changes must have struck him in the
city. In Visscher's panoramic view of London, taken
from Southwark nearly opposite to St Paul's, a very
clear general impression may be gained of the appearance
of the English capital in that year of sixteen
hundred and sixteen, the year when Shakespeare was
dying at Stratford-on-Avon, when Raleigh was on his
way to his last journey across the Atlantic, and when
Francis Bacon was writing his famous essays in Gray's
Inn. Those quaint, circular, Martello-like buildings in the
foreground are the Globe and Swan theatres, with the
Bear Garden close by; but the former theatre, in Visscher's
view, is not the one so intimately connected with Shakespeare,
for that was burned down in 1613, and the building
represented here is the new one erected upon its site.
Opposite to the Swan Theatre, on the Surrey side of the
river, are Paris Garden Stairs, where was a much
frequented ferry, Blackfriars Bridge now spanning the
river where this ferry once used to ply. There was
also a theatre at Blackfriars, and Shakespeare and his
players must often have used the ferry on their way
from the Globe Theatre across the river from Blackfriars,
where the poet lived. In front is old St Paul's,
towering over all the surrounding buildings and dwarfing
the highest; scores of spires and towers break the skyline
as the eye follows the panorama towards the west,
where stands the former old London Bridge, covered
along its sides with picturesque houses. So large and
-----File: 048.png---------------------------------------------------------
massive are the great blocks of gabled buildings that
span the bridge, that it presents the appearance of a
little town crossing the river, such as is the Ponte
Vecchio at Florence in little. The gates at its ends are
covered with men's heads, stuck all over their roofs like
pins upon a pincushion. More steeples and towers crown
the opposite bank, and as the eye travels farther eastward
it is arrested by the Tower, with its encircling wall, and
its river wharf all covered with cannon. The river is
alive with vessels of every shape and size, State barges
and little pinnaces, great galleons and small craft, appear
in all directions, some with, some without sails. Beyond,
the distant hills of Middlesex and Essex are dotted with
villages and hamlets, whilst on the heights of Highgate
cluster a group of windmills. It is a wonderful panorama
that the old Dutch artist has handed down to us. Looking
at it we see the same scene, the same picture of time-honoured
churches and palaces, the noblest river in the
world flowing beneath them, and bearing on its shining
surface all the pleasure, commerce, industry, and travail
of old London, that Shakespeare did, when, standing
near his theatre at Bankside, he gazed upon that shifting
scene. All is changed now, except the Tower. The
great Gothic cathedral of St Paul's and most of its surrounding
churches, whose towers and spires helped to
make old London an object of beauty, perished in the
great fire which swept over the city fifty years after
Visscher drew his panorama. Old London Bridge escaped
the fire, and indeed remained until 1834, although the
houses clustering over it had been removed at the close
of the reign of George II., and the only prominent
building in the panorama which Shakespeare or Raleigh
would now be able to recognise, could they look across
the rivers Styx and Thames, would be the great White
Tower with its surrounding lesser towers and battlements.
All the rest, like "the baseless fabric of a vision," has
passed away for ever.
-----File: 049.png---------------------------------------------------------

But to return to Sir Walter Raleigh. He invested
all that remained of his own and his wife's fortunes in
furnishing the expedition to Guiana, which proved so
disastrous, on which he now embarked. On his return,
a ruined man and a prisoner, he expressed his amazement
at having thus in one desperate bid placed his
life and all that he possessed in that unlucky venture.
But before Raleigh had left England, Gondomar, the
Spanish Ambassador, had told his master, the King of
Spain, that Raleigh was a pre-doomed man. For James
had not only revealed every detail relating to the Guiana
expedition to Gondomar, but on condition that if any
subject or property belonging to Spain were touched he
had promised to hand over Raleigh to the Spanish Government
in order that he might be hanged at Seville. To
assure Gondomar of his good faith, James actually showed
the ambassador a private letter written him by Raleigh,
in which the exact number of his ships, men, and the
place where the great silver mine was said to be located
on the Orinoco, were all set forth. As the Spaniards
claimed the whole of Guiana, it was evident that
if Raleigh landed there he must infringe upon the
Spanish possessions, and thus place himself, according
to James's promise to Gondomar, in the power of his
enemies.

The expedition sailed from England at the end of
March 1617, from Plymouth, and consisted of fourteen
ships and nine hundred men. But its story was one of
continued disaster, and on the 21st of June 1618, writing
to his friend Lord Carew, Raleigh gives a detailed account
of all his misfortunes. In the postcript[** postscript] he adds: "I beg
you will excuse me to my Lords for not writing to them,
because want of sleep for fear of being surprised in my
cabin at night" (even on his own ship he was a prisoner,
the crew having mutinied) "has almost deprived me of
sight, and some return of the pleurisy which I had in
the Tower has so weakened my hand that I cannot
-----File: 050.png---------------------------------------------------------
hold the pen." Sir Walter's eldest son was killed
gallantly fighting in Guiana.

Then followed a miserable time, and on his road to
London the hope of life at times impelled him to attempt
escape, but he was doomed to drink the bitter cup of his
King's ingratitude to the dregs. On the 10th of August
he again entered the Tower where so much of his life
had been spent, and which was now to be his last abode
on earth.

The next day the Council of State met to decide
upon Sir Walter's fate, and incredible as it seems, it
was actually debated whether Raleigh should be handed
over to the tender mercies of the Spaniards or executed
in London. Surely if what passed on this earth could have
been known to Elizabeth, she would have burst her tomb
at Westminster to protest against this abomination, this unspeakable
shame and disgrace to the name of England.

James was now all impatience to get rid of Raleigh
as quickly as possible; he trembled at the threats of
Gondomar, and had the sapient monarch not given his
word that Raleigh should die? The great difficulty
before the Council, however, was to find a pretext for
condemning Raleigh to death. Bacon and his colleagues
racked their wise brains to invent a cause by which he
could be found guilty of high treason. At length the
Lord Chief-Justice, Montagu, with a committee of the
Council decided that the King should issue a warrant
for the re-affirmation of the death sentence given at
Winchester in 1603, by which it might be made valid
and carried out. Sir Walter pleaded that the King's
commission appointing him head of the Guiana expedition
with powers of life and death, invalidated the former
sentence and its punishment, both in the eyes of justice
and of reason. But Sir Walter was overruled. On the
24th of October the warrant for the execution was signed
and sealed by the King, and four days later Sir Walter
was taken from the Tower to the King's Bench. He
-----File: 051.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Entrance to the Bloody Tower and Steps leading
to Raleigh's Walk</i>]
-----File: 052.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 053.png---------------------------------------------------------
was then suffering from ague, and having been roused
from his sleep very early had not had time to have his
now snow-white hair dressed with his usual care. One
of his servants noticed this as he was being taken away,
and telling him of it, Raleigh answered, smiling, "Let
them kem (comb) it that have it," then he added, "Peter,
dost thou know of any plaister to set a man's head on
again when it is cut off?"

The end being now so certain and so near, the bright
courage of the man returned; there was no shrinking
with the closing scene so close at hand. He was not
brought back to the Tower after his condemnation, and
he passed his last night upon earth in the Gate House
at Westminster, close to which the scaffold stood in Old
Palace Yard. He had a last parting that evening with
his devoted wife, his "dear Bess," but neither dared to
speak of their only remaining son--that would have
been too bitter a pang for them to bear. Sir Walter's
last words to his wife were full of hope and courage:
"It is well, dear Bess," he said, referring to Lady
Raleigh having been promised his body next day, the
only mercy allowed her by the Council, "that thou
mayest dispose of that dead which thou hadst not
always the disposing of when alive." Then she left him.
During the long hours of that last night, he composed
those beautiful lines which will last as long as the
language in which they are written:

/*
"Even such is time! who takes in trust
Our youth, our joys, and all we have,
And pays us but with earth and dust:
Who in the dark and silent grave,
When we have wandered all our ways,
Shuts up the story of our days.
But from that earth, that grave, that dust,
The Lord shall raise me up I trust."
*/

Raleigh wrote these lines in a Bible which he had brought
with him from the Tower.
-----File: 054.png---------------------------------------------------------

Carlyle has summed up Raleigh's life and death in the
following pregnant lines, in his "Historical Sketches":--

/#
"On the morning of the 29th of October 1618 in Palace Yard, a cold
morning, equivalent to our 8th of November, behold Sir Walter Raleigh, a
tall gray-headed man of sixty-five gone. He has been in far countries,
seen the El Dorado, penetrated into the fabulous dragon-realms of the
West, hanged Spaniards in Ireland, rifled Spaniards in Orinoco--for forty
years in quest a most busy man; has appeared in many characters; this
is his last appearance on any stage. Probably as brave a soul as lives
in England;--he has come here to die by the headman's axe. What
crime? Alas, he has been unfortunate: become an eyesore to the
Spanish, and did not discover El Dorado mine. Since Winchester, when
John Gibb came galloping (with a reprieve), he has been lain thirten[**thirteen] years
in the Tower; the travails of that strong heart have been many. Poor
Raleigh, toiling, travelling always: in Court drawing-rooms, on the hot
shore of Guiana, with gold and promotions in his fancy, with suicide,
death, and despair in clear sight of him; toiling till his brain is broken
(his own expression) and his heart is broken: here stands he at last; after
many travails it has come to this with him."
#/

Sir Walter Raleigh died a martyr to the cause of a
Greater Britain; his life thrown as a sop to the Spanish
Cerberus by the most debased and ignoble of our kings.
Raleigh's faults were undoubtedly many, but his great
qualities, his superb courage, his devotion to his country,
his faith in the future greatness of England, were infinitely
greater, and outweighed a thousand times all his
failings. The onus of the guilt of his death--a judicial
murder if ever there was one--must be borne by the base
councillors who truckled to the King, and by the King
himself who, Judas-like, sold Raleigh to Spain.

Some less interesting State prisoners occupied the Tower
towards the close of the inglorious reign of James Stuart.
Among these were Gervase, Lord Clifford, imprisoned for
threatening the Lord Keeper in 1617. Clifford committed
suicide in the Tower in the following year. About the
same time, Sir Thomas Luke, one of the Secretaries of
State, and his daughter, were imprisoned in the Tower on
the charge of insulting Lady Exeter, whom they accused
of incest and witchcraft, but, whether the charges were true
-----File: 055.png---------------------------------------------------------
or false, they were soon liberated. James's court seems
to have combined all the vices, for Lord and Lady Suffolk
were also prisoners in the fortress about the same time,
accused of bribery and corruption.

To the Tower also were sent the two great lawyers--Lord
Chancellor Bacon, and Sir Edward Coke--the former
for having received bribes, the latter for the part he had
taken in supporting the privileges of the House of
Commons. Here, also, two noble lords, the Earl of
Arundel and Lord Spencer, were in durance, owing to
a quarrel between them in the House of Lords, when
Arundel had insulted Spencer by telling him that at no
distant time back his ancestors had been engaged in tending
sheep, to which Lord Spencer responded: "When
my ancestors were keeping sheep, yours were plotting
treason." The dispute seems scarcely of sufficient importance
to have sent both disputants to the Tower.

In 1622 the Earl of Oxford and Robert Philip, together
with some members of Parliament, were sent to the fortress
for objecting too publicly to the suggested marriage of the
Prince of Wales, afterwards Charles I., with a Spanish
princess; and the Earl of Bristol was also in the Tower
for matters connected with the same projected alliance.
It was not always safe to have an opinion of one's own
under James the First.

The last State prisoner of mark to be sent to the Tower
in James's reign was Lionel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex,
who had been found guilty of receiving bribes in his
official capacity as Lord High Treasurer.
-----File: 056.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XIII

CHARLES I. AND THE COMMONWEALTH


With the close of the reign of James I. the Tower ceased
to be a royal residence--the Stuart kings, in fact, never
passing more than a night or two in the old fortress prior
to their coronation, after which they only visited it on
very rare occasions. James himself only occupied the
Tower-Palace on the eve of opening his first Parliament;
and as the plague had broken out in the city at the time
of Charles the First's coronation, that king did not even
stay the previous night in the building, nor does he appear
ever to have visited the fortress during the whole of his
stormy reign of four and twenty years.

A very remarkable man occupied a prison in the Tower
early in Charles's reign. This was Sir John Eliot, "fiery
Eliot" Carlyle calls him. He was first of that noble band
of patriots who defied Charles's tyranny, and had been
sent to the Tower in the winter of 1624-25 for censuring
Buckingham during Charles's second Parliament, but he
remained there only a short time. In the March of 1628,
however, Eliot, with a batch of independent members of
the House of Commons--amongst whom were Denzil
Holles, Selden, Valentine, Coryton, and Heyman--was
again imprisoned in the Tower. Eliot had boldly declared
that the "King's judges, Privy Council, Judges and
learned Council had conspired to trample under their feet
the liberties of the subjects of the realm, and the liberties
of the House." Denzil Holles and Valentine were the
two members who had kept the Speaker in his chair by
-----File: 057.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Byward Tower</i>]
-----File: 058.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 059.png---------------------------------------------------------
main force; the others were committed to prison for using
language reflecting on the King and his Ministers. For
the following three months these members of Parliament
were kept in close confinement in the fortress, books and
all writing materials being strictly kept from them. In
May, Sir John Eliot was taken to Westminster, where
an inquiry was held but no judgment given. After his
return to the Tower, however, Eliot was allowed to write
letters, and was also given "the liberty of the Tower,"
and permitted to see a few friends. In the month of
October Eliot and the others were taken to the chambers
of the Lord Chief-Justice, and thence to the Marshalsea
Prison, a change which he jokingly described as having
"left their Palace in London for country quarters at Southwark."
Then they were tried, and Eliot, being judged
the most culpable, was fined two thousand pounds, and
ordered to be imprisoned in the Tower during the King's
pleasure. As for the fine, Eliot remarked that he "possessed
two cloaks, two suits of clothes, two pairs of boots,
and a few books, and if they could pick two thousand
pounds out of that, much good might it do them." The
fearless member never quitted the Tower again, for a
galloping consumption carried him off two years after he
had written the above lines. There can be no doubt
that this consumption was not a little owing to the harsh
treatment he endured. In 1630 he wrote to his friend
Knightley, alluding to rumours of his being released.
"Have no confidence in such reports; sand was the best
material on which they rested, and the many fancies of
the multitude; unless they pointed at that kind of libertie,
'libertie of mynde.' But other libertie I know not, having
so little interest in her masters that I expect no service
from her." His prison was frequently changed, and many
restraints were put upon him, for, on the 26th of December,
he writes to his old friend, the famous John Hampden, that
his lodgings have been moved. "I am now," he says,
"where candle-light may be suffered, but scarce fire. None
-----File: 060.png---------------------------------------------------------
but my servants, hardly my sonne, may have admittance
to me; my friends I must desire for their own sake to
forbear coming to the Tower." Poor Eliot was dying fast
in the year 1632, but his last letter to Hampden, dated
the 22nd of March, is full of his old brave spirit, and the
gentle humour that distinguished this great and good
man. The letter concludes thus: "Great is the authority
of princes, but greater much is theirs who both command
our persons and our will. What the success of their
Government will be must be referred to Him that is master
of their power." The doctor had informed the authorities
that any fresh air and exercise would help Eliot to live,
but all the air they gave him was a "smoky room," and
all the exercise, a few steps on the platform of a wall.
On the 27th of November Eliot died, "not without a suspicion
of foul play," wrote Ludlow some years afterwards.

Eliot's staunch friends, Pym and Hampden, moved in
the House for a committee "to examine after what manner
Sir John Eliot came to his death, his usage in the Tower,
and to view the rooms and place where he was imprisoned
and where he died, and to report the same to the House,"
a motion which shows how matters had changed for the
better since the days of Elizabeth, none of whose Parliaments
would have dared thus to question the treatment of
State prisoners.

The blame of his untimely death--for he was but forty-two--rests
upon those who let him die by inches in his
prison as much as if they had beheaded him on Tower
Hill. John Eliot died a martyr in the cause of constitutional
liberty as opposed to monarchical autocracy.
Eliot's son petitioned the King to be allowed to remove
his father's body to their old Cornish home at St Germains,
but the vindictive and narrow-minded monarch, who would
not even forgive Eliot after death had intervened, refused
the prayer, writing at the foot of the petition, "Lett Sir
John Eliot's body be buried in the church of the parish
where he died." No stone marks the spot where he is
-----File: 061.png---------------------------------------------------------
buried, and his dust mingles with that of the illustrious
dead in St Peter's Chapel in the Tower, but his name
will be remembered as long as liberty is loved in his
native land.

We now come to a period of quite another sort.

In Carlyle's "Historical Sketches," John Felton, the
assassin of Buckingham, is thus described:--"Short, swart
figure, of military taciturnity, of Rhadamanthian energy
and gravity.... Passing along Tower Hill one of these
August days (in 1628) Lieutenant Felton sees a sheath-knife
on a stall there, value thirteen pence, of short, broad
blade, sharp trowel point." We know the use Felton
made of that Tower Hill knife on his visit to Portsmouth,
where Buckingham was then about to set sail for his
second expedition to La Rochelle; how he stabbed the
gay Duke to the heart, exclaiming, as he struck him:
"God have mercy on thy soul!" how he was promptly
arrested, brought to London and imprisoned in the Tower.

The reason, or reasons, for Felton killing Buckingham
have never been made clear. He appears to have been
a soured religious fanatic, but the crime was doubtless
owing to some fancied injustice regarding his promotion
in the army; and it has been thought that it was merely
an act of private vengeance, rather than one of political
significance. But after his arrest a paper was found
fastened in Felton's hat, with the following writing upon
it:--"That man is cowardly, base, and deserveth not the
name of a gentleman or soldier, that is not willing to
sacrifice his life for the sake of his God, King, and his
countrie. Lett no man commend me for doing of it, but
rather discommend themselves as the cause of it, for if God
hath not taken away our hearts for our sins, he would not
have gone so long unpunished.--Jno. Felton." A sentiment
which goes to show that Felton assassinated Buckingham
with the fanatical idea of benefiting his country.

So hated was Buckingham by the people, that Felton
passed into the Tower amid blessings and prayers. He
-----File: 062.png---------------------------------------------------------
was placed in the prison lately occupied by Sir John Eliot
in the Bloody Tower, and before his death made two
requests--one, that he might be permitted to take the Holy
Communion, and the other that he might be executed with
a halter round his neck, ashes on his head, and sackcloth
round his loins. On being threatened with the rack in
order to induce him to give the names of his accomplices,
Felton said to Lord Dorset that, in the first place, he
would not believe that it was the King's wish that he
should be tortured, it being illegal; and, secondly, that if
he were racked, he would name Dorset, and none but
him--a capital answer. When he was asked why sentence
of death should not be passed upon him, he answered:
"I am sorry both that I have shed the blood of a man
who is the image of God, and taken away the life of so
near a subject of the King." As a last favour, he begged
that his right hand might be struck off before he was
hanged. He suffered at Tyburn, and his body was gibbeted
in chains at Portsmouth. "His dead body," writes
Evelyn, "is carried down to Portsmouth, hangs high there.
I hear it creak in the wind." An eye-witness describes
Felton as showing much courage and calm during his trial
and at his death, and Philip, Earl of Exeter, who attended
the execution, declared that he had never seen such valour
and piety, "more temperately mixed," as in Felton's demeanour.
This is surely one of the strangest mysteries
in our history.

Prisoners still continued to come to the Tower, and
in 1631, Mervin, Lord Audley, was executed on Tower
Hill for a crime not of a political nature. Six years later
a very distinguished ecclesiastic, John Williams, Bishop
of Lincoln, was imprisoned for four years within the Tower
walls. Williams, who was a Privy Councillor, had repeated
some remarks made by the King, in which His
Majesty had advocated greater leniency in the treatment
of the Puritans, and was accused of revealing Charles's
private conversation, and being an enemy of Laud's was
-----File: 063.png---------------------------------------------------------
very hardly dealt with in consequence. He was deposed
from his bishopric, fined £10,000, and imprisoned in the
Tower, where he caused some surprise, if not scandal, by
not attending the church services in the fortress. However,
after his release, Williams was reconciled to the
King, and in 1641 became Archbishop of York. He
had been successively Dean of Salisbury and Dean of
Westminster, and had succeeded Bacon as Lord Chancellor
in 1621, just before he had been appointed to the See
of Lincoln. Williams certainly belonged to the Church
Militant, and during the Civil War defended Conway
Castle most gallantly for the royal cause. At the end of
December 1641, he was back again in the Tower, with
ten other Bishops who had protested that, owing to their
being kept out of the House of Lords by the violence of
the mob, all Acts passed during their absence were illegal.
The Peers arrested the protesting Bishops on a charge
of high treason; and on a very cold and snowy December
night they were all sent to the Tower, where they remained
until the May of 1642.

Lord Loudon, who had been sent by the Scottish
Covenanters to Charles, had a narrow escape of leaving
his head on Tower Hill in 1639. According to Clarendon,
a letter was discovered of a treasonable nature, signed by
Loudon, addressed to Louis XIII. of France, and Charles
ordered Sir William Balfour, by virtue of a warrant signed
by the royal hand, to have the Scottish lord executed the
following morning. In this terrible dilemma Loudon bethought
him of his friend, the Marquis of Hamilton, and
gave the Lieutenant a message for that nobleman. Now
it was one of the privileges of the Lieutenant of the Tower
that he could at any time, or in any place, claim an
audience with the sovereign. Hamilton persuaded Balfour
to go with him to Charles, but on arriving at Whitehall,
they found that the King had already retired for the night.
Balfour, however, taking advantage of his privilege, entered
the room with Hamilton, and together they besought
-----File: 064.png---------------------------------------------------------
Charles to re-consider his decision, pointing out to him
that Loudon was protected by his quality as Ambassador
from the Scotch. The King, as was his wont, was
obdurate. "No," he said; "the warrant must be obeyed."
At length the Marquis, having begged in vain, left the
chamber, saying, "Well, then, if your Majesty be so
determined, I'll go and get ready to ride post for Scotland
to-morrow morning, for I am sure before night the whole
city will be in an uproar, and they'll come and pull your
Majesty out of your palace. I'll get as far as I can, and
declare to my countrymen that I had no hand in it." On
hearing this, Charles called for the warrant and destroyed
it. Loudon was soon afterwards released (Oldnixon's
"History of the Stuarts").

Now comes the story of the last days of one of Charles's
most noted counsellors--last days that, as in the case of
many before him, were passed within the grim precincts
of the Tower, and were the prelude to execution. On
the 11th of November 1640, the Earl of Strafford was at
Whitehall laying before Charles a scheme for accusing the
heads of the parliamentary party of holding a treasonable
correspondence with the Scotch army, then encamped in
the North of England. Whilst he was with the King the
news reached him that Pym at that very moment was impeaching
him in the House of Commons on the charge of
high treason. Strafford at once made his way to the
House, but was not allowed to speak, and shortly afterwards
heard his committal made out for the Tower. At
the same time Archbishop Laud was arrested at Lambeth
Palace, and carried off to the great State prison. "As I
went to my barge," Laud writes in his diary, "hundreds
of my poor neighbours stood there and prayed for my
safety and return to my home." But neither he nor
Strafford were ever to return to their homes. Perhaps
Strafford's life might have been saved had it not been for
the King's action, for when it became known that Charles
had plotted with the hope of inducing the Scottish army
-----File: 065.png---------------------------------------------------------
to march on London, seize the Tower and liberate Strafford,
the great Earl was practically doomed. The city rose
as one man, a huge mob surging round the Houses
of Parliament and the Palace of Whitehall, shouting
"Justice."

For fifteen days Strafford faced his accusers and judges
at Westminster Hall, his defence being a splendid piece
of oratory. He proved that on the ground of high treason
his judgment would not count, and his judges were compelled
to introduce an Act of Attainder in order to convict
him; but for the next six months he was kept in the
Tower, uncertain as to his ultimate fate until the 12th of
May 1641, when the Bill of Attainder was passed by the
Lords.[A]

Charles had sworn to Strafford that not a single hair
of his head should be injured; but on the Earl writing to
him and offering his life as the only means of healing the
troubles of the country, the King yielded, and deserting
his minister, gave his assent to the execution, and signed
the warrant.

On the following morning Strafford was led out to die.
There is no more dramatic episode in the great struggle
between Charles and his people than that when Strafford,
amidst his guards, passed beneath the gateway of the
Bloody Tower, where, from an upper window, his old
friend, Archbishop Laud, gave him his blessing. The
Archbishop, overcome, sank back fainting into the arms
of his attendants. "I hope," he is reported to have said,
"by God's assistance and through mine own innocency
that when I come to my own execution, I shall shew the

[Footnote A: In a series of fac-simile letters of illustrious personages published by John Thorne
in 1793, is the following from Strafford to his wife. It is dated from the Tower the 4th
February 1640--but this date is evidently a mistake, and 1641 must be the year:--

"Sweet Harte," he writes, "it is long since I writt unto you, for I am here in such
trouble as gives me little or noe respett. The Charges now cum in, and I am now able,
prayse God, to tell you, that I conceave there is nothing Capitall, and for the rest I
knowe at the worste his Ma.ty will pardon all without hurting my fortune, and then we
shall be happy by God's grace. Therefore, comfortt your self, for I trust these cloudes
will pass away, and that we shall have faire weather afterwardes. Farewell.--Your
loving husband,

/*
<sc>Strafford</sc>."
*/
]
-----File: 066.png---------------------------------------------------------
world how much more sensible I am to my Lord Strafford's
loss than I am to my own."

Knowing how bitterly Strafford was hated by the
people, the Lieutenant of the Tower invited him to drive
to Tower Hill in his coach, fearing he might be torn to
pieces if he went on foot. Strafford, however, declined
the offer, saying, "No, Mr Lieutenant, I dare look death
in the face, and I trust the people too." With the Earl
were the Archbishop of Armagh (Ussher), Lord Cleveland,
and his brother, Sir George Wentworth. On reaching the
scaffold Strafford made a short speech, followed by a long
prayer, and giving his final messages for his wife and
children to his brother, said: "One stroke more will make
my wife husbandless, my dear children fatherless, my poor
servants masterless, and will separate me from my dear
brother and all my friends; but let God be to you and to
them all in all." He then removed his doublet, and said,
"I thank God that I am no more afraid of death, but as
cheerfully put off my doublet at this time as ever I did
when I went to bed." Then placing a white cap upon his
head, and thrusting his long hair beneath it, he knelt down
at the block, the Archbishop also kneeling on one side and
a clergyman upon the other, the Archbishop clasping
Strafford's hands in both his own. After they had left him
Strafford gave the sign for the executioner to strike by
thrusting out both his hands, and at one blow, "the wisest
head in England," as John Evelyn, who was present, says,
"was severed from his body." On that night London
blazed with bonfires, and the people rejoiced as if in
celebration of some great victory.

The great Earl's mistake was in serving and trusting
such a king as Charles. Later on it transpired that
Charles had a plan of removing Strafford from the Tower
by throwing a hundred men into the fortress, thus relieving
the Earl, and keeping possession of the Tower as a check
upon the city. In pursuance of this plan, on the 2nd
May 1641, Captain Billingsby with a force of one hundred
-----File: 067.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

/#
<sc>The true maner of the execution of thomas earle of strafford[**italic "s"?] Lord</sc>
Lieutenant of Ireland vpon Tower hill the 12th of May 1641
#/

/*
A. Doctor Vfher Lord Primate[**hyphen assumed] of Ireland
B. the Sherifes of London
C. the Earle of Strafford
D. his kindred and Friends
*/

<i>Execution of the Earl of Strafford, May 12^{th}. 1641.</i>]
-----File: 068.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 069.png---------------------------------------------------------
men presented himself at the gates of the Tower, but Sir
William Balfour refused to admit them, and the King's
scheme for taking the fortress fell to the ground.

The first beginnings of a Tower regiment, according to
Mr J. H. Round, was the appointment of two hundred
men as Tower Guards in 1640. In November of the same
year Charles promised to remove this garrison, but he did
not do so until the city offered to lend him £25,000, on
the condition that these troops should be taken away, as
well as the ordnance from the White Tower, which was a
perpetual menace to the safety of the city. Aersen, the
Dutch Ambassador, writing to his Government about this
time, says, "le dessein semble aller sur le tour." Still the
King would not withdraw the soldiers or the cannon, and
then the House of Lords expostulated with him, but
Charles excused his breach of faith by saying that his
object was merely to insure the safety of the stores and
ammunition in the fortress.

After his plot to seize the Tower had been made public,
the train bands belonging to the Tower Hamlets occupied
and garrisoned the fortress. These train bands, as well
as those of Southwark and Westminster, were distinct
from the city train bands. On the 3rd of January 1642,
the King made another attempt to garrison the Tower
with his own troops, which also proved a failure. On this
occasion Sir John Byron entered the fortress with a
detachment of gunners and disarmed the men of the
Tower Hamlets, but the city train bands came to the
rescue, and Byron, with his gunners, had to beat a retreat.
When, in 1642, the Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir John
Conyers, resigned his charge, the Parliament conferred the
Lieutenancy upon the Lord Mayor of London. Later, in
1647, when the city had taken the side of the Parliament
against the King, Fairfax was appointed Constable; the
Constables had succeeded each other according to the
chances which brought the King or the Parliament to
the top, thus Lord Cottrington had been replaced by Sir
-----File: 070.png---------------------------------------------------------
William Balfour, and he in his turn had given room to
Sir Thomas Lumsford, a "soldier of fortune," writes
Ludlow of him in his "Memoirs," "fit for any wicked
design." Lumsford, so uncomplimentarily referred to by
Ludlow, was supposed to be willing to act according to the
King's good pleasure, and succeeded in making himself so
unpopular with the Londoners, that they petitioned the
House of Lords to beg the King to place the custody of
the Tower in other hands, the Lord Mayor saying he
could not undertake to prevent the apprentices from rising
were Lumsford allowed to remain in office; so Charles
unwillingly gave the keys of the fortress to the care of
Sir John Byron. Byron, in his turn, was succeeded by Sir
John Conyers, who had distinguished himself in the
Scottish wars and had been Governor of Berwick; and
after Conyers followed Lord Mayor Pennington,[A] "in
order," as Clarendon writes, "that the citizens might see
that they were trusted to hold their own reins and had a
jurisdiction committed to them which had always checked
their own." From 1643 to 1647 the Tower remained in
the hands of the Parliament. In the latter year the army
obtained the mastery, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, the
Commander-in-Chief, became its Constable, under him
being Colonel Tichbourne as Lieutenant of the fortress.
Shortly after the King's execution, however, Fairfax
resigned his post of Constable, none other than Cromwell,
himself, stepping into the vacant place.

But we must return to Archbishop Laud, who for four
years was a prisoner in the Bloody Tower in the prison
chamber over the gateway of that gloomy building.

In his diary, the Archbishop has left a minute account
of a domiciliary visit paid him by William Prynne in 1643.
The Archbishop's trial being determined on by the House

[Footnote A: Sir Isaac Pennington was a fishmonger, and elected Alderman of the Ward of
Bridge Without, January 29th, 1638; and became Lord Mayor, 1641-42. He was one
of the Commissioners who sat upon the trial of Charles I., for which he was condemned
to death at the Restoration, but was not executed. He was sent to the Tower August
25th, 1660, where he died on the 17th of the following December.]
-----File: 071.png---------------------------------------------------------
of Lords, Prynne was commissioned by the Peers to obtain
Laud's private papers. "Mr Prynne," writes the Archbishop,
"came into the Tower with other searchers as
soon as the gates were open. Other men went to other
prisoners; he made haste to my lodging, commanded the
warder to open my doors, left two musketeer centinels
below, that no man might go in or out, and one at the
stairhead. With three others, which had their muskets
already cocked, he came into my chamber, and found me
in bed, as my servants were in theirs. I presently thought
on my blessed Saviour when Judas led in the swords and
staves about him."--This surely is rather a bold comparison
for an Archbishop to make?--"Mr Prynne, seeing me
safe in bed, falls first to my pockets to rifle them; and by
that time my two servants came running in half ready.
I demanded the sight of his warrant; he shewed it to me,
and therein was expressed that he should search my pockets.
The warrant came from the close committee, and the
hands that were to it were these: E. Manchester, W. Saye,[**P1: del. ,? "Saye and Sele" one title]
and Seale, Wharton, H. Vane, Gilbert Gerard, and John
Pym. Did they remember when they gave their warrant
how odious it was to Parliament, and some of themselves,
to have the pockets of men searched? When my pockets
had been sufficiently ransacked, I rose and got my clothes
about me, and so, half ready, with my gown about my
shoulders, he held me in the search till half-past nine of
the clock in the morning. He took from me twenty and
one bundles of papers which I had prepared for my defence;
two Letters which came to me from his gracious
Majesty, about Chartham and my other benefices; the
Scottish service books or diary, containing all the occurrences
of my life, and my book of private devotions, both
which last were written through with my own hand. Nor
could I get him to leave this last, but he must needs see
what passed between God and me, a thing, I think, scarce
offered to any Christian. The last place that he rifled
was my trunk, which stood by my bedside. In that he
-----File: 072.png---------------------------------------------------------
found nothing, but about forty pounds in money, for my
necessary expenses, which he meddled not with, and a
bundle of some gloves. This bundle he was so careful
to open, so that he caused each glove to be looked into.
Upon this I tendered him one pair of gloves, which he
refusing, I told him he might take them, and fear no bribe,
for he had already done me all the mischief he could, and
I asked no favour of him, so he thanked me, took the
gloves, bound up my papers, left two centinels at my
door, and went his way."--(From "Troubles and Trials
of Archbishop Laud.")

Prynne, whose ears Laud had been the means of cutting
off some half-dozen years before, must have enjoyed this
visit to his old foe. On the 10th of March 1643, the
Archbishop was brought to his trial in Westminster Hall,
but amongst all the charges brought against him none
could be considered as proving him guilty of high treason.
Serjeant Wild was obliged to admit this, but said that
when all the Archbishop's transgressions of the law were
put together they made "many grand treasons." To this
Laud's counsel made answer, "I crave you mercy, good
Mr Serjeant, I never understood before this that two
hundred couple of black rabbits made a black horse."--(In
Archbishop Tennison's MSS. in Lambeth Library.
Quoted by Bayley.)

Laud's trial lasted for twenty days, the chief accusation
brought against him being that he had "attempted to
subvert religion and the fundamental laws of the realm."
The outcome of the trial was that Laud was beheaded on
Tower Hill on 10th of January 1644. Laud was a strange
compound of bigotry and intolerance, of courage and of
devotion to what he considered to be the true Church,
and of which he seemed to regard himself as a kind of
Anglican Pope. His life and character are enigmas to
those who study them, and his death became him far
better than his life had done.

Carlyle, in a delightful passage in his posthumously
-----File: 073.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: WILLIAM LAUD

<i>Aerts Bisschop van Cantelbury, binnen London
Onthalft den 10 January, Anno 1645</i>

<i>Arnt Pieters Exeuait</i>]
-----File: 074.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 075.png---------------------------------------------------------
published "Historical Studies," writes: "Future ages, if
they do not, as is likelier, totally forget 'W. Cant,' will
range him under the category of Incredibilities. Not again
in the dead strata which lie under men's feet, will such
a fossil be dug up. This wonderful wonder of wonders,
were it not even this, a zealous Chief Priest, at once
persecutor and martyr, who has no discernible religion
of his own?" "No one," said Laud, when told of the
day on which he was to die, "no one can be more ready
to send me out of life than I am to go." Indeed, no one
could have left life in a calmer or more tranquil manner
than did the Archbishop. It must be a great support to
have a sublime opinion of oneself, and if ever man had
a sublime opinion of himself it was Laud. The comparison
he made in his diary, and which I have already quoted,
between his Saviour and himself--between Prynne-Judas
and Laud-Christ--proves the ineffable self-conceit of the
prelate.

The fact that he himself was notoriously indifferent, if
not callous, to the sufferings of others, has destroyed all
the sympathy that might have been felt for this strange
character in his fall and tribulations. For a mere difference
of opinion Laud would order ears to be lopped off,
noses slit, and brows and cheeks to be branded with red-hot
iron. His best and most enduring monument is the
addition he made to St John's College at Oxford, of which
he was at one time the president, and in whose chapel his
remains were re-interred, after resting for a time in the
Church of All Hallows, Barking, and in the library of
which his spectre is said to be seen occasionally gliding
on moonlight nights, between the old bookshelves.

After the month of August 1642, when Charles had
unfurled his standard at Nottingham, the Tower, although
nominally still in the King's possession, was in reality held
by the Parliament; and its prisoners were those who were
opposed to the representatives of the people. Among
these was Sir Ralph Hopton, who had protested against
-----File: 076.png---------------------------------------------------------
a violent address made by the Parliament against Charles,
Sir Ralph having declared that his fellow-members "seemed
to ground an opinion of the King's apostacy upon less
evidence than would serve to hang a fellow for stealing
a horse." This remark brought him to the Tower, where
he was soon joined by another member of Parliament,
Trelawney (or Trelauney), who had informed the House
of Commons that they could not legally appoint a guard
of troops for themselves without the King's assent, under
pain of high treason (Clarendon).

Sir Ralph, afterwards Lord Hopton of Stratton, distinguished
himself later in the war in the West of England,
where he had much success, and with the help of Sir
Beville Grenville, gained a signal victory over the Parliamentarians
at Stamford Hill, near Stratton, in Cornwall.
Fairfax, however, ultimately proved too strong for him,
and finally Hopton left England, dying at Bruges in 1652.

Besides these, Sir Thomas Bedingfield and Sir James
Gardner were committed to the Tower by the House of
Lords, "for refusing to be of the counsel of the Attorney-General,"
whilst the Earl of Bristol and Judge Mallet
followed them to the fortress, "merely for having seen the
Kentish petition." This petition was drawn up by the
principal inhabitants of that county, praying, "that the
militia might not otherwise be exercised in that county
than the known law permitted, and that the Book of
Common Prayer, established by law, might be observed."
Lord Bristol soon obtained his liberty, but Mallet was
kept a prisoner for two years on the charge of being
"a fomentor and protector of malignant factions against
the Parliament" (Clarendon).

In the same year, Sir Richard Gurney, Lord Mayor
of London, was sent to the Tower on the charge of having
caused the King's proclamation against the militia, and
for suppressing petitions to Parliament, to be published
in the city. Sir Richard was dismissed from his mayoralty,
and imprisoned during the pleasure of the House. Another
-----File: 077.png---------------------------------------------------------
Lord Mayor, loyal to the cause of the King, Sir Abraham
Reynoldson, was, six years later, also a prisoner in the
Tower; but his incarceration lasted only two months,
whilst Gurney, it seems, remained for several years in the
fortress. The Parliament meted out heavy punishment for
"opinions," Lord Montagu of Boughton, the Earl of
Berkshire, and some Norfolk squires, being likewise sent
to the Tower on a charge of favouring the King's side,
and of being hostile to the Parliament. In 1643 Justice
Berkeley was imprisoned by order of the Lords on a
charge of high treason, and also a Mr Montagu, a
"messenger" from the French Court to the King.

At this time whole batches of Cavaliers began to be
frequently brought to the Tower. Of these, Sir William
Moreton, who was captured at the fall of Sudeley Castle,
of which he was the governor, remained a prisoner until
the Restoration, when he was made a judge. Another
was Daniel O'Neale, who had greatly distinguished himself
on the royal side in the Scottish war, and later in
England. He was committed to the Tower on the invariable
charge of high treason, but, like Lord Nithsdale,
about half-a-century later, he managed to break his prison
in female attire, and succeeded in reaching Holland, whence
he returned to serve under Rupert as a lieutenant-colonel
in the Prince's cavalry. According to Clarendon, O'Neale
became a celebrated adept in court intrigue in the time
of Charles II.

In this year (1643), Sir John Conyers was in command
of the fortress, having received the charge from the
Parliament in the hope that he would be gained over
to that side. On being asked to take the command of
the Parliamentary army, Conyers, however, declined, his
refusal causing so much annoyance to the leaders of that
party that he thought it more prudent to resign his charge
of the Tower, being, as Clarendon puts it, too conscientious,
"to keep His Majesty's only fort which he could
not apply to his services." His place, as has already
-----File: 078.png---------------------------------------------------------
been said, was given to Sir Isaac Pennington, Lord
Mayor of London.

In 1644, Sir John Hotham, and his son, Captain
Hotham, who had been imprisoned in the Tower in the
preceding summer on the charge of intending to surrender
the town of Hull to the King, were both beheaded on
Tower Hill. Hotham may be described as the Bazaine
of the Parliament. The town of Hull was the greatest
magazine of arms and ammunition in England. Charles
had in vain summoned Hotham, who was the Governor for
the Parliament, to surrender the town, and on his refusal
had declared him a traitor. There is little doubt that both
Hotham and his son were Royalists at heart, and both
were convicted of having entered into a correspondence
with the King's party in order to come to terms for the
surrender of the town and arsenal to the Royalist forces.

Another governor--Sir Alexander Carew, who held
Plymouth for the Parliament--was beheaded in the same
month as the Hothams for a like "intention." Carew is
said to have been decapitated with the same axe with which
Strafford was killed, and it was reported that at the time
of Strafford's trial, Carew had said that sooner than not
vote for the Earl's death, he would be ready to be the
next man to suffer on the same scaffold, and with the same
axe: a wish which was literally fulfilled. (Dugdale's
"Short View of the Late Troubles.")

By one of those strange vagaries of fortune which are
the characteristic of the history of this period, and in which
the Tower played its accustomed part of imprisonment,
George Monk, the future Duke of Albemarle, and one of
the makers of our history, was imprisoned in the Tower
for three years after his capture by Fairfax at the siege
of Nantwich. He was a colonel at the time, and only
regained his freedom by consenting to take the command
of the Parliamentary forces sent to Ireland (Ludlow's
Memoirs).

Two of Monk's fellow-prisoners, Lord Macquire and
-----File: 079.png---------------------------------------------------------
Colonel MacMahon, who had both been fighting on the
Royalist side in Ireland, made a desperate attempt to
escape from the Tower in this same year (1644). They
succeeded in sawing through their prison door and lowered
themselves by a rope, which they had been enabled to
find through directions written on a slip of paper that
had been placed in a loaf of bread, sent to them by some
of their friends. They got down into the moat, across
which they swam, but were taken on the other side and
hanged at Tyburn in February 1645, although Macquire
pleaded that, as an Irish peer, he had the right of dying
by the axe and not by the halter. For allowing the escape
of these officers from their prison chamber the Lieutenant
of the Tower was fined heavily.

That splendid cavalier, "Old Loyalty," as he was
proudly called, John Paulett, Marquis of Worcester, who
had defended Baring House so long and so well, came
a prisoner into the Tower in this same year, accompanied
by Sir Robert Peake, who had aided him in the defence
of his home, and who had also been taken prisoner after
the storming of the place. They were followed by Sir
John Strangways, who had been taken at the siege of
Cardiff. In 1647 Sir John Maynard, Serjeant Glynn, the
Recorder of London, and the Lord Mayor, Sir John Gayre,
with some of his aldermen and sheriffs, were in the Tower,
and amongst the Royalists who were brought to the
fortress as Charles's fate was closing over him, were the
Earl of Cleveland, Judge Jenkins, Sir Lewis Davies, and
Sir John Stowell.

At the time of the King's death on the scaffold in front
of the Banqueting House at Whitehall, many of his most
devoted adherents were close prisoners in the Tower,
among them being James, Duke of Hamilton, one of
Charles's closest friends, who had made a rash attempt
to invade England in 1648, and, meeting Cromwell, was
defeated and made prisoner at Uttoxeter. For fellows
in misfortune the Duke had George Goring, Earl of
-----File: 080.png---------------------------------------------------------
Norwich, Lord Capel, and the Earl of Holland--taken
after the surrender of Colchester Castle--and Sir John
Owen. The imprisonment of captured Royalists by the
Parliament was but too often the prelude to their execution,
but before the Duke and Lord Holland were beheaded,
much interest was made to save them--more
particularly Lord Holland; but Cromwell was obdurate,
and they were both put to death in New Palace Yard.
Lord Capel had succeeded in getting out of his prison.
There is an interesting account of his escape and recapture
given by Lord Clarendon in his "History," and, although
lengthy, may be quoted here as throwing an interesting
light upon those times of revolution. "The Lord Capel,
shortly after he was brought prisoner to the Tower from
Windsor Castle, had, by a wonderful adventure, having
a cord and all things necessary conveyed to him, let himself
down out of the window of his chamber in the night,
over the wall of the Tower, and had been directed through
what part of the ditch he might be best able to wade.
Whether he found the right place, or whether there was
no safer place, he found the water and the mud so deep,
that if he had not been by the head taller than other men,
he must have perished, since the water came up to his
chin. The way was so long to the other side, and the
fatigue of drawing himself out of so much mud so intolerable,
that his spirits were near spent, and he was once
ready to call out for help, as thinking it better to be
carried back to the prison, than to be found in such a
place, from whence he could not extricate himself, and
where he was ready to expire. But it pleased God that
he got at last to the other side, where his friends expected
him, and carried him to a chamber in the Temple, where
he remained two or three nights secure from any discovery,
notwithstanding the diligence that could not be used to
recover a man they designed to use no better. After two
or three days a friend whom he trusted much, and who
had deserved to be trusted, conceiving he might be more
-----File: 081.png---------------------------------------------------------
secure in a place to which there was less resort, and where
there were so many harboured who were every day sought
after, had provided a lodging for him in a private house
in Lambeth Marsh; and calling upon him in an evening
when it was dark, to go thither, they chose rather to take
a boat they found ready at the Temple Stairs, than to
trust one of that people with their secret, and it was so
late that there was only one boat left there. In that the
Lord Capel (as well disguised as he thought necessary)
and his friend put themselves, and bid the waterman to
row them to Lambeth. Whether, in their passage thither,
the other gentleman called him 'my lord,' as was confidently
repeated, or whether the waterman had any
jealousy by observing what he thought was a disguise,
when they were landed, the wicked waterman undiscerned
followed them, till he saw into what house they went;
and then went to an officer and demanded: 'What he
would give him to bring him to the place where Lord
Capel lay?' And the officer promising to give him ten
pounds, he led him presently to the house, where that
excellent person was seized upon, and the next day carried
to the Tower."

Lord Capel was after this sentenced to be hanged,
but this was commuted to his being beheaded, the sentence
being carried out in front of Westminster Hall on the
9th March 1649. Clarendon writes of him as being, "the
noblest champion his party possessed; a man in whom
the malice of his enemies could discover very few faults,
and whom his friends could not wish better accomplished."
Arthur Capel had been created Baron Capel of Hadham in
Hertfordshire by Charles I., and his son, Arthur, was
created Earl of Essex by Charles II., coming, as we shall
see, to a tragic end in the Tower in that monarch's reign.

Sir John Owen, that gallant Welsh knight, who had
fought long and valiantly for the Royal cause, was taken
prisoner at the engagement near Llandegas, and was imprisoned
with the Duke of Hamilton and his fellow-*
-----File: 082.png---------------------------------------------------------
*Cavaliers at Windsor Castle before going to the Tower.
At his trial Owen told his judges "that he was a plain
gentleman of Wales, who had been taught to obey the
King; that he had served him honestly during the war,
and finding that many honest men endeavoured to raise
forces whereby he might get out of prison, he did the
like." When he was condemned to be beheaded, he made
his judges a low bow and said: "It was a great honour
to a poor gentleman of Wales to lose his head with such
noble lords; for, by God," he added, "he was afraid they
would have hanged him." But the gallant old Cavalier
did not lose his head, for Ireton stood up in the House
and said that although the noble lords who had been
condemned to death had many advocates, plain Sir John
Owen had not one to speak for him. Ireton interceded
so well, that Sir John was pardoned, and after a few
months' imprisonment in the Tower, was released. He
went back to his beloved country, where he died in 1666,
and rests in the church of Penmorven, in his native county
of Carnarvonshire.

The execution of the other Cavaliers caused much
indignation, and, as was the fashion of the times, some
pamphlets were written on the subject against those in
power, Colonel John Lilburne being the most prominent
of the pamphleteers. He, with three other writers,
Walwayn, Prince, and Overton, were sent to the Tower
by order of the Parliament for writing against its authority.
Lilburne was banished the country, the others were liberated.
The Colonel, who was known as "Freeborn John,"
was a born pamphleteer, and no amount of prisons or
pillories stopped his output of what was certainly seditious
matter. There is a strong resemblance between "Freeborn
John" and the French pamphleteer, Rochefort, of
our own time, for whatever Government was in power
he opposed it by his writings. In later life he became a
Quaker, because he was determined to enjoy what he
considered "Christian Liberty."
-----File: 083.png---------------------------------------------------------

The Parliament met with considerable opposition from
the Lord Mayor of the city. In 1648 Lord Mayor Sir
Abraham Reynardson was kept prisoner in the Tower
for two months, because he refused to publish in the city
the Ordinance of the House of Commons, abolishing the
title of King. Sir Abraham was one of the city worthies.
He had been Master of the Merchant Taylors Company
in 1640-41, and had filled the highest civic post in the
city for six months prior to his imprisonment, and had
valiantly resisted the "turbulent disorders," and the
tyranny of the Rump Parliament, which had tried in vain
to force the Corporation of London to follow its commands.
Sir Abraham was not only imprisoned, but was also fined
£2000, and degraded from the office of Lord Mayor.
Reynardson's generosity was great, and he is reported to
have spent £20,000 whilst he was Lord Mayor, not inclusive
of the heavy fine. But his loyalty to the Crown
was unshaken, and he most willingly suffered both loss
of office and fortune in the Royalist cause. His portrait,
recently acquired by the Company of Merchant Taylors,
is one of the most interesting features of their splendid
hall. Sir Abraham was re-elected to the Lord Mayoralty
on the return of Charles II. (see C. M. Clode's "Memoirs
of Sir A. Reynardson"). The list of Royalist prisoners
gained additions almost every month. At this time an
agent of the young King's, named Penruddock, was in
the Tower with Sir John Gell, Colonel Eusebius Andrews,
and Captains Benson and Ashley. Colonel Andrews, an
old Royalist, was beheaded on Tower Hill; Gell, who
was a Parliamentary General, and who left some interesting
memoirs of the Civil War, was released after an
imprisonment of two years. Benson was hanged at
Tyburn, and Ashley was liberated. All these were suspected
of plotting against the Parliament, and to them
may be added Lords Beauchamp, Bellasis, and Chandos,
committed to the Tower by the Council of State, "upon
the suspicion of designing new troubles." Lord Howard
-----File: 084.png---------------------------------------------------------
of Escrick and a minister named Love were in the Tower
at the same period--the former, who was a member of
Parliament, being imprisoned on a charge of bribery whilst
contesting the city of Carlisle; he was dismissed the House
and fined £10,000. The minister, Christopher Love, had
been a preacher at St Anne's, Aldersgate, and St Lawrence's,
Jewry, and was the author of many theological
works. After the death of Charles the First he became
as violent a Royalist as he had been a republican, and was
found to be in correspondence with Charles the Second.
His pardon was eagerly begged by many London parishes,
and by no less than fifty-four of the clergy, but all they
could get was a respite for a month, and Love was beheaded
in July 1651. His execution caused much stir, as
is proved by the fact that a Dutch allegorical engraving
was made of the scene, an engraving which, after
those of the executions of Strafford and Laud, is the
earliest representation of an execution on Tower Hill
in existence. Lord Clarendon writes that "when Love
was on the scaffold he appeared with a marvellous
undauntedness." In the same year, after the Battle of
Worcester, the Tower was filled with the captured
Royalists from that disastrous fight. With these came
the Earls of Lauderdale, Kelly, and Rothes, General
Massey and General Middleton, the earls being soon
removed to Windsor Castle, where they remained prisoners
until the Restoration. The two generals were enabled
to escape from the Tower, and joined Charles in Paris,
"to the grief and vexation of the very soul of Cromwell,"
writes Clarendon. These constant escapes from the Tower
during the power of the Parliament and the Commonwealth
would seem to point to great laxity in its protection, or
to sympathy on the part of its guardians with the prisoners.

In the September of the following year the famous
Edward Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, and Earl of
Glamorgan, was a prisoner of the Commonwealth in the
Tower. It was he who, with much show of probability,
-----File: 085.png---------------------------------------------------------
is supposed to have come within reasonable distance of
inventing the steam-engine. He published in 1665 a
book with a long title, which may be abbreviated into
"A Century of Invention," which Horace Walpole unkindly
called "an amazing piece of folly." Worcester
died in 1667, and the model of his steam-engine is supposed
to have been buried with him.

During the closing years of the Protectorate most of
the State prisoners in the Tower were those implicated
in schemes for assassinating Cromwell. One of these
schemes, in 1654, brought Lord Oxford, Sir Richard
Willis, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, and his brother, John Gerrard,
with other Cavaliers, to the fortress, charged with belonging
to a set of conspirators who aimed at taking the Protector's
life. It was proved that they had met at a tavern where
it was proposed to kill Cromwell, seize the Tower, and
proclaim Prince Charles king. One of the conspirators,
named Fox, turned what would now be called king's
evidence, with the result that two of his fellow-conspirators
were executed--Vowel, who was hanged at Charing Cross,
and John Gerrard, who was beheaded on Tower Hill.

In the following year Cromwell made a raid among
the officers of the Cavalier party, many of whom were
seized and cashiered, Major-General Overton being sent
to the Tower. Two other generals came there to bear
him company in the same year, Generals Penn and
Venables. They had made a disastrously unsuccessful
expedition to the West Indies, which so exasperated
Cromwell that on their return he ordered both of them
to be imprisoned. A year later the Lieutenant of the
Tower was ordered to release "one that goes by the
name of Lucy Barlow, who for some time hath been a
prisoner in the Tower of London. She passeth under
the character of Charles Stuart's wife; and hath a young
son whom she openly declareth to be his; and it is
generally believed; the boy being very like him; and
both the mother and child provided for by him" ("Mer-*
-----File: 086.png---------------------------------------------------------
*curis Politicus," 1656). This Lucy Barlow was better
known later on as Lucy Walters, and her son, who was
then, and for some time to come, known by the name of
James Crofts, became Duke of Monmouth.

Clarendon describes at some length the strange story
of the death in the Tower, in 1657, of Miles Syndercombe,
once an intimate friend of Cromwell's, but who for some
unknown reason became involved in one of the many
plots for assassinating the Protector. Syndercombe was
sentenced to death, and it being expected that an attempt
at his rescue might take place, he was most carefully
guarded in his prison. On the morning of the day fixed
for the execution, however, Syndercombe was found dead
in his bed, but nevertheless the corpse was dragged at a
horse's tail to the place of execution, a stake being driven
through it after it was buried: Cromwell's enemies accused
him of having caused his former friend to be poisoned.

Cromwell, who, with all his natural courage lived in
constant terror of assassination, in 1658 ordered all Royalists
to live twenty miles away from London, and sent Colonel
Russell, Sir William Compton, and Sir William Clayton,
together with Henry Mordaunt, Lord Peterborough's
brother, to the Tower. Mordaunt had been in the young
King's employment, and, with a Dr Hewet, was put upon
his trial for conspiracy. Mordaunt was acquitted, but Hewet
was found guilty, and beheaded on Tower Hill. Another
eminent Royalist, Sir Henry Slingsby, a great Yorkshire
magnate who had fought for Charles, was also beheaded
in the same year.

During the short interval that elapsed between the
death of Cromwell in September 1658 and the return of
Charles II. in May 1660, the Tower contained many
important prisoners. Among them were Lady Mary
Howard, the daughter of the Earl of Berkshire, and
another lady, a Mrs Sumner, both of whom appear to
have been mixed up in Mordaunt's conspiracy against
Cromwell, as well as a Mr Ernestus Byron and a Mr
-----File: 087.png---------------------------------------------------------
Harlow for the same cause. Other Royalists then in
the fortress were Lord Falkland, Lord Delaware, the
Earl of Chesterfield, Lords Falconbridge, Bellasis, Charles
Howard, and Castleton, who had all taken part in a
Royalist rising in Cheshire under the leadership of Sir
George Booth. None of these, however, suffered more
than a short imprisonment.

While the faction of the Parliament was making a
desperate stand against the military party in the government
of the country, an attempt was made by the former
to seize the Tower. "The Lieutenant, Colonel Fitz, had
consented that Colonel Okey, with 300 men, should be
dispersed in the vicinity prepared for the enterprise,
promising that on a certain day he would cause the
gates to be opened at an early hour for the passage of
the Colonel's carriage, at which time Colonel Okey with
his men, embracing the opportunity, might seize the guards
and make themselves masters of the place. This plot,
however, was discovered, and on the night before its
intended execution Colonel Desborough being despatched
from the Army, with a body of horse, changed the guards,
seized the Lieutenant, and placed a fresh garrison in the
Tower under the command of Colonel Miller" (Ludlow's
"Memoirs").

Shortly after this episode, and during a disturbance
amongst the soldiers there, Lenthal, the Speaker of the
House of Commons, proceeded to the Tower, and removing
the Lieutenant, who had been appointed by the
Committee of Safety, conferred the government of the
fortress upon Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper. But when
General Monk declared for the King, that officer seized
the fortress in the name of his royal master, released many
of the prisoners, and placed in it a garrison commanded by
Major Nicholson.

It was now the turn of the Royalists, and in the month
of March 1660, Sir Arthur Hazelrigge and Colonel John
Lambert were placed in the Tower because they had
-----File: 088.png---------------------------------------------------------
opposed Monk's design for the restoration of the King,
an event which showed the other members of the Committee
in which direction the wind was blowing, and they
made an attempt to secure the Tower by victualling the
fortress, with the intention of standing a siege if it were
necessary. Ludlow proposed that a force of two thousand
men should join Colonel Morley's regiment in the Tower,
that the building itself should be stored with provisions
for six months, and that two thousand sailors should also
be placed within its walls as an additional security for its
defence. This scheme, however, came to nothing.

Samuel Pepys has given a description of how Lambert
escaped from his prison in the Tower, "The manner of
the escape of John Lambert out of the Tower, as related
by Rugge:--That about eight of the clock at night he
escaped by a rope tied fast to his window, by which he
slid down, and in each hand he had a handkerchief; and
six men were ready to receive him, who had a barge to
hasten him away. She who made the bed, being privy
to his escape, that night, to blind the warder when he
came to lock the chamber door, went to bed, and possessed
Colonel Lambert's place and put on his night-cap. So,
when the said warder came to lock the door according to
his usual manner, he found the curtains drawn, and conceiving
it to be Colonel Lambert, he said, 'Good-night,
my lord.' To which a seeming voice replied, and prevented
all further jealousies. The next morning, on
coming to unlock the door, and espying her face, he
cried out, 'In the name of God, Joan, what makes you
here? Where is my Lord Lambert?' She said, 'He
is gone; but I cannot tell whither.' Whereupon he caused
her to rise and carried her before the officer in the Tower,
and (she) was committed to custody. Some said that a
lady knit for him a garter of silk, by which he was
conveyed down, and that she received £100 for her pains."

Lambert was, however, retaken by Colonel Ingoldsby
in Warwickshire, together with some other Roundhead
-----File: 089.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Vaulting in the Cradle Tower</i>]
-----File: 090.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 091.png---------------------------------------------------------
officers who had joined him, and he was again placed in
the Tower. At the Restoration he was banished to
Guernsey, where he remained a prisoner until his death
in 1683. Lambert had a high military reputation amongst
the Roundheads, and had contributed greatly to the
victory at Naseby, as well as defeating the Royalists
both in Scotland and in the Midlands: his fame was
such that Cromwell was supposed to have been somewhat
jealous of his successes.
-----File: 092.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XIV

CHARLES II.


Immediately after the return of Charles II. in the month
of May 1660, the trials and executions of the late King's
judges began. The first of the regicides to be sent to
the Tower was Major-General Thomas Harrison, who
was committed for high treason on 19th May, and on
the 11th of the following October, drawn on a hurdle to
Charing Cross, and there hanged and quartered. Harrison,
who was the son of a Nantwich butcher, and had
been bred for the law, had been useful to the Protector
in keeping down the Presbyterian faction. He died
stoutly asserting the righteousness of the cause for which
he suffered. The same fate befell Gregory Clement and
Colonel John James, both members of the High Court of
Justice which had condemned Charles I. Clement had
succeeded in hiding himself in a house near Gray's Inn,
but was discovered and brought before the Commissioners
of the Militia, to whom, however, he was not known by
sight. He would probably have escaped, when it chanced
that a blind man came into the room as Clement was
quitting it, and recognised him by his voice, upon which
Clement was arrested and sent to the Tower (Ludlow's
"Memoirs"). Among the other regicides confined within
the Tower during that summer were Colonel Bamfield,
Colonel Hunks, Colonel Phair, Francis Corker, Captain
Hewlet, and John Cook, the last of whom had conducted
the prosecution against the King. Hewlet was accused
of having been one of the masked executioners at Whitehall,
but this was never proved.
-----File: 093.png---------------------------------------------------------

James Harrington, the author of the political romance
called "The Commonwealth of Oceana," was imprisoned
in the Tower early in this reign. He became insane, and
was transferred from prison to prison. His book, by which
he was made famous, laid down a plea for a lasting republic,
the government of which was to be maintained by
rotation. This unhappy author died in 1677, and was laid
near Sir Walter Raleigh in St Margaret's, Westminster.

In the same summer of Charles's restoration, the
Marquis of Argyll, who was shortly afterwards beheaded
at Edinburgh, was a prisoner in the Tower charged with
high treason, and with having sided with Cromwell; with
him was the Marquis of Antrim. The Laird of Swinton
was another prisoner of this year, being imprisoned upon
various charges, one of which was that he intended to
kill the King whilst pretending to be touched by Charles
for "the evil"--<i>i.e.</i> scrofula; and also for deserting the
army at the Battle of Dunbar.

The next illustrious name that one comes to in the
portentous annals of the Tower is that of Sir Harry Vane,
whose death was a monstrous injustice, Charles confessing
as much when he himself said of Vane that "he was too
dangerous a man to let live, if we can honestly put him
out of the way." Although Vane had much to do in
bringing Strafford to his death, he was not in any way
concerned with the execution of Charles I., and had, on
the contrary, always been opposed to that great mistake.
However, in the month of July 1660, he was sent to the
Tower, whence he was taken to be imprisoned in the Scilly
Isles, then brought back to the Tower in March 1662, and
beheaded on Tower Hill in that same year. At his trial
he had pleaded Charles's promise of a "merciful indemnity
to all those not immediately concerned in his father's
death," which should, at any rate, have saved Sir Harry
from the scaffold. But Vane was too good a man for
Charles to tolerate, and his execution was a judicial murder
of the basest kind. Both Houses of Parliament had voted
-----File: 094.png---------------------------------------------------------
for an Act of Indemnity in Vane's favour, but they were
over-ruled by the King and his creatures. Pepys took
the trouble to rise early on the morning of the 14th of June
to see Vane's execution. "Up by four o'clock in the
morning and upon business in my office. Then we sat
down to business, and about eleven o'clock, having a room
got ready for us, we all went out to the Tower Hill; and
there, over against the scaffold, made on purpose this day,
saw Sir Harry Vane brought. A very great press of
people. He made a long speech, many times interrupted
by the Sheriffs and others there, and they would have
taken his paper out of his hand, but he would not let it
go. But they caused all the books of those that writ after
him (reporters?) to be given to the Sheriffe, and the
trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he might
not be heard. Then he prayed, and so fitted himself,
and received the blow; but the scaffold was so crowded
that we could not see it done." Sir Harry had been a
thorn in Cromwell's flesh, and the Protector's exclamation,
"The Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!"
is historical.

To return to the year 1660, Colonels Axten and Hacker,
the latter of whom had commanded the guard at the King's
trial and at his execution, together with one of his judges,
Thomas Scott, were hanged at Charing Cross.

In October of the same year, Henry Martin, one of
the most prominent of the regicides, was imprisoned for
life, and died twenty years later in Chepstow Castle.
Another was General Edmund Ludlow, author of the
"Memoirs," who died in Switzerland, after an exile of
thirty-two years. Some twenty persons in all were executed
in the most brutal fashion, while the bodies of
Cromwell, Ireton, and the greatest sailor that England
ever had before Nelson, Blake, were torn from their
graves in the Abbey, gibbeted at Tyburn, and buried
beneath the gallows, Cromwell's head having been cut
from the body and stuck up on Westminster Hall.
-----File: 095.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Old Cannon and Mortars on the west side of the White Tower</i>]
-----File: 096.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 097.png---------------------------------------------------------
Charles's government respected neither the dead nor the
rights of nations in the matter of taking vengeance upon
the late King's judges.

On the 22nd of April 1661, Charles left Whitehall in
state for the Tower, to prepare for his coronation in the
Abbey the following day, as was the custom. Charles
the Second was the last of our sovereigns to sleep in the
Tower on the eve of his coronation, he being lodged that
night in the royal apartments on the southern side of the
White Tower, the greater part of the Palace, including
the Great Hall, having been pulled down during the
Protectorate.

We will let Pepys recount the procession from the
Tower--where, as was also the custom, Charles had
created a number of Knights of the Bath--to Whitehall.
"Up early and made myself as fine as I could, and put
on my velvet coat, the first day that I put it on, though
made half a year ago. And being ready, Sir W. Batten,
my Lady, and his two daughters, and his son and wife,
and Sir W. Penn, and his son and I, went to Mr Young's,
the flagmaker, in Corne-hill; and there we had a good
room to ourselves, with wine and good cake, and saw the
show very well. In which it is impossible to relate the
glory of the day, expressed in the clothes of them that
rid, and their horses and horse-clothes, among others my
Lord Sandwich's embroidery and diamonds were ordinary
among them. The Knights of the Bath was a brave
show of itself; and their Esquires, among which Mr
Armiger was an Esquire to one of the Knights. Remarquable
were the two men that represented the two Dukes
of Normandy and Aquitaine. The Bishops came next
after Barons, which is the higher place; which makes me
think that the next Parliament they will be called to the
House of Lords. My Lord Monk rode bare after the
King, and led in his hand a spare horse, as being the
Master of the Horse; the King, in a most rich and embroidered
suit and cloak, looked most noble. Wadlow
-----File: 098.png---------------------------------------------------------
the vintner (Wadlow was the original of 'Sir Simon the
King,' the favourite air of Squire Western in 'Tom
Jones') at the Devil in Flete Streete, did lead a fine
company of soldiers, all young comely men, in white
doublets. Then followed the Vice-Chamberlain, Sir G.
Carteret, a company of men all like Turks; but I know
not yet what they are for. The streets all gravelled, and
the houses hung with carpets before them, made brave
show, and the ladies out of the windows, one of which
over against us I took much notice of, and spoke to her,
which made good sport among us. Glorious was the
show with gold and silver, that we were not able to look
at it, our eyes at last being so much overcome with it.
Both the King and the Duke of York took notice of us,
as they saw us at the window."

Another contemporary writer says: "Even the vaunting
French confessed their pomps of the late marriage with
the Infanta of Spain (the wedding of Louis XIV. with
Maria Theresa of Spain) at their Majesties' entrance into
Paris, to be inferior in state, gallantry, and riches, to this
most glorious cavalcade from the Tower."

The same year that saw the coronation of Charles
witnessed a strange form of punishment to three prisoners
in the Tower. These were Lord Monson, Sir Henry
Mildmay, and Robert Wallop, who were imprisoned for
holding republican views. They were sentenced to lose
their rank, to be drawn on hurdles to Tyburn from the
Tower and back again, and imprisoned for life.

A large number of other political prisoners were sent
to the different prisons throughout the country, and many
were also shipped off to the Pacific Islands, where they
were sold as slaves. Perhaps the worst case of any was
that of three of the late King's judges who had escaped
into Holland. They were seized in that country by an
emissary of the English Government, and, against all the
laws of nations, brought back to England, imprisoned in
the Tower, and suffered death as felons. These three
-----File: 099.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: [**why italic "S"'s?]STEEPLE IN SOUTHWARKE IN ITS FLOURISHING CONDITION BEFORE THE FIRE <i>Designed by W. Hollar of P??</i>[** F1 illegible (cont. 103.png)]

<i>London before the Great Fire.</i>

(<i>From an engraving by Hollar</i>[**. ?])][** F1 illus. cont. on 103 png.]
-----File: 100.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 101.png---------------------------------------------------------
men were Colonel Okey--whom we mentioned as having
attempted to seize the Tower after Cromwell's death--Colonel
Barkstead, and Miles Corbet. They were executed
in April 1662. Barkstead had been knighted by
Cromwell, the Parliament had entrusted him with the
custody of the Tower, and he had also acted as Major-General
of London. He is supposed to have enriched
himself whilst head of the Tower, by exacting money
from the prisoners in his keeping. His head was placed
over the Traitor's Gate in the Tower. Although he
and his companions may have deserved their fate, the
manner of their seizure reflects the greatest discredit upon
the government of Charles, which, as I have already said,
neither respected the rights of the living nor reverenced
the dead.

Between the years 1660 and 1667, some necessary
repairs were undertaken in the Tower, some five hundred
pounds being expended thereon. In 1680 more extensive
repairs were made, owing to reports made by members
of the House of Lords who had been appointed by the
King in Council, to inquire into "repairs and other works
to be done, in and about the said Tower of London, for
the safety and convenience of the garrison therein" (Harleian
MSS.). An elaborate report was drawn up, the
estimate for the necessary alterations amounting to
£6097, 2s., but like most of the important undertakings
at that time, little, if anything, was accomplished. The
order for these repairs issued by the Treasury stated that
the above sum would be provided "so soon as the state of
His Majesty's affairs would permit": but knowing the state
of Charles's "affairs," we may be sure nothing came of it.

During the Great Fire of 1666, the Tower ran the
most perilous risk in all its history of utter destruction,
and it was only by the timely blowing up of the buildings
which abutted on the walls of the fortress and by the
side of the moat, that the historical structure was saved.
The conflagration began at midnight on the 1st September
-----File: 102.png---------------------------------------------------------
in a house in Pudding Lane, not far from where the
monument erected in its commemoration now stands.
Pepys, that most invaluable of chroniclers and domestic
historians, then lived in Seething Lane, Crutched Friars.
"Lord's Day, 2nd September," he writes: "I made
myself ready presently, and walked to the Tower, and
there got up upon one of the high places (perhaps Pepys
mounted to the top of the White Tower), Sir J. Robinson's
little son going up with me. And there I did see the
houses at that end of the bridge all on fire, and an infinite
great fire in this and the other side of this and of that
bridge." On the seventh of this September Pepys bears
witness to the King's energy in bringing assistance to the
sufferers by the conflagration. "In the meantime," he
writes, "his Majesty got to the Tower by water, to
demolish the houses about the Graffs (?), which being
built entirely about it, had they taken fire, and attacked
the White Tower where the magazine of powder lay,
would undoubtedly not only have beaten down and
destroyed all the bridge, but sunk and torn the vessels
in the river, and rendered the demolition beyond expression,
for several miles about the country."

Charles certainly showed the Stuart courage as well
as resourcefulness at a crisis, for there can be little doubt
that he was chiefly instrumental in saving the Tower, by
ordering the blowing up of the dangerous buildings attached
to its walls.

In Hollar's panoramic view of London before and after
the Great Fire, here reproduced, it will be seen how very
close was the approach of the conflagration to the walls
of the ancient fortress. Another danger threatened the
Tower in this same year, a Captain Rathbone, with some
other officers, having formed a plan for scaling the outer
walls, and killing Sir John Robinson,[A] after securing the

[Footnote A: Sir John Robinson was a clothworker, and elected Alderman of Dowgate, December
18th, 1655, and chosen Sheriff, June 24th, 1657. He was removed to Cripplegate,
December 7th, 1658, and made Lord Mayor in 1662, being appointed Lieutenant of the
Tower on September 22nd, 1663. He was the eldest son of the Reverend William]*
-----File: 103.png---------------------------------------------------------

[** F1 illus. cont. from 099.png][Illustration: APPEARETH NOW AFTER THE SAD CALAMITIE AND DESTRVCTION BY FIRE In the Yeare M. DC. LXVI.[** F1 this line within illus.]

/*
<i>Wenceslaus Hollar delin: et sculp: 1666, Cum Privilegio.</i>
*/

<i>London after the Great Fire.</i>

(<i>From an Engraving by Hollar.</i>)]
-----File: 104.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 105.png---------------------------------------------------------
gates. It was one of the Anti-Royalist plots with which
the period was so rife, and, like the majority of them, ended
in failure; Rathbone and his gang were taken prisoners
and promptly hanged at Tyburn.

Among other prisoners there at this time was Thomas,
Lord Buller of Moor Park, incarcerated for having
challenged the Duke of Buckingham to a duel, and also
the Marquis of Dorchester, for "quarrelling with and using
ill language to that duke"; the latter was likewise in the
Tower, and not for the first time. On this occasion
Buckingham was charged with treasonable correspondence
and with stirring up a mutiny in the Army. Few persons
of the time were so frequently made acquainted with the
prison chambers of the Tower as this roystering ne'er-do-well,
"that life of pleasure, and that soul of whim," George
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, who was, in all, five times
confined in the Tower, his first visit having been paid during
the Protectorate because he had married Fairfax's daughter,
an event that greatly enraged Cromwell. In 1666 he was
imprisoned for insulting Lord Ossory, the son of the Duke
of Ormond, in the House of Lords. But he was never a
prisoner for long, the last occasion being when, together
with Shaftesbury, Wharton, and Salisbury, he opposed the
"Courtiers' Parliament." All four were sent to the Tower,
but Buckingham, after making a humble apology, was released.
On leaving the Tower he passed under Shaftesbury's
windows; the latter had refused to submit.
"What," said Shaftesbury to Buckingham, "are you
leaving us?" "Why, yes," answered Buckingham, "such

*[Footnote: Robinson, Archdeacon of Nottingham, and was knighted at Canterbury on 26th May
1660, and created a baronet in the June of the same year.... He was a nephew of
Archbishop Laud, and married Anne, daughter of Sir George Whitmore, a knight and
an alderman. He was Lieutenant of the Tower from 1661 to 1678. King Charles II.
and his Queen, the Queen-mother and the Duke and Duchess of York, dined with him at
the Clothworkers' Hall, where he kept his mayoralty on the 23rd of June 1663. The
pageant performed by his Company at his inauguration was entitled "London's Triumph."
The <i>Gazette</i> of April 23rd to 26th, 1666, contains an account of the trial of certain persons
for high treason for conspiring to kill him and other officers of the Tower, and to fire the
city. He was a benefactor to the Clothworkers' Company, who still preserve his portrait
in their hall.]
-----File: 106.png---------------------------------------------------------
giddy fellows as I am can never stay long in one
place."

Constantly in trouble, Buckingham was so boon a
companion of the King's that Charles could not long let
him remain out of his sight, whatever the follies of which
the Duke might have been guilty. Another of these
brilliant but dissipated friends and courtiers of Charles II.
who was sent to the Tower, was the infamously famous
John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester. He was there in 1669
for having abducted Elizabeth Mallet, "la triste heritière[**héritière],"
as Grammont calls her. Ultimately Rochester married the
lady, and she made a most devoted wife to a most worthless
and unfaithful husband.

Charles had been greatly irritated by the preference of
the beautiful Frances Stuart, "la Belle Stewart" of
Grammont, for the Duke of Richmond, and his rival had
to pass three weeks in the Tower in consequence of the
Royal jealousy. The Duke, however, had his way, and
married the fair Frances after eloping with her. Another
of Charles's courtiers was placed in the fortress in 1665,
Lord Morley, for having killed a Mr Hastings. Morley
was a noted duellist, and also what was afterwards termed
a "Mohawk," and aided by one, Bromwich, had murdered
his victim in a street brawl.

Pepys, we have noted, was often in and about the
Tower during these years, but the most interesting entry
in his diary relating to the fortress, belongs to the year
1662. Under the date of the 20th October he writes:
"To my Lord Sandwich, who was in his chamber all alone,
and did inform me that an old acquaintance hath discovered
to him £7000 hid in the Tower, of which he was
to have two for the discovery, my lord two, and the King
the other three, when it is found; and the King's warrant
to search, runs for me and one Mr Lee. So we went, and
the guard at the Tower Gate making me leave my sword,
I was forced to stay so long at the alehouse close by, till
my boy run home for my cloak. Then walked to Minchen
-----File: 107.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Castrum Royale Londinense, vulgo the Tower.[**F1 this line within illus.]

<i>The Tower in the time of Charles II[**. ?]</i>

(<i>from an etching by Hollar[**. ?]</i>)]
-----File: 108.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 109.png---------------------------------------------------------
Lane, and got from Sir H. Bennet the King's warrant
for the paying of £2000 to my lord and other two of the
discoverers. After dinner we broke the matter to the
Lord Mayor, who did not, and durst not, appear the least
averse to it. So Lee and I and Mr Wade were joined by
Evett, the guide, W. Giffin, and a porter with pickaxes.
Coming to the Tower, our guide demanded a candle, and
down into the cellars he goes. He went into several little
cellars and then out-of-doors to view, but none did answer
so well to the marks as one arched vault, where after much
talk, to digging we went, till about eight o'clock at night,
but could find nothing, yet the guides were not discouraged.
Locking the door, we left for the night, and
up to the Deputy Governor, and he do undertake to keep
the key, that none shall go down without his privity.
<i>November 1st.</i> To the Tower to make one trial more,
where we staid several hours, and dug a great deal under
the arches, but we missed of all and so we went away the
second time like fools. To the Dolphin Tower. Met
Wade and Evett, who do say that they had from Barkstead's
own mouth." Pepys and his fellow treasure-hunters
then paused in their operations, but on the 17th December
we read in this Diary, "This morning were Lee, Wade,
and Evett, intending to have gone upon our new design
upon the Tower, but it raining, and the work being done
in the open garden, we put it off to Friday next." And
this is the last we hear of the Tower treasure, and for all
that we know that £7000 is still under some vault in the
old building, hidden in the "butter firkins" in which it
was supposed to have been placed.

Three years after the Great Fire, Pepys gives an
account of a visit he paid to his friend Sir William
Coventry on the 11th of March 1669, when he went to
see him in what was then called "My Lord of Northumberland's
Walk," a place not now to be identified, which
had at its end an iron shield with the Earl's arms engraved
upon it and holes in which to place a peg for every turn
-----File: 110.png---------------------------------------------------------
made by the pedestrian during his walk: this must have
been the prison exercise of the so-called "Wizard Earl,"
Raleigh's friend.

Pepys visited his friend Sir William Coventry very
frequently when the latter was imprisoned in the Tower.
Sir William had, through the medium of Henry Savile,
challenged the Duke of Buckingham to a duel in March
1669, and three days after the challenge Savile was committed
to the Gate House Prison, and Coventry to the
Tower.

Savile was a gentleman of the Duke of York's, who,
being indignant at the slight put upon him by being sent
to the Gate House, asked if he might not be sent to the
Tower, and his wish was granted. Pepys was unremitting
in his attentions to his old friend Coventry, although by
constantly seeing him he was placing himself in the black
books of Charles and the Duke of York. We find him
calling, on March 4th, upon Coventry in his prison in the
Brick Tower when he was in charge of a son of "Major
Bayly's, one of the officers of the Ordnance," again on the
following day he visits him and finds Coventry, "with
abundance of company with him." The visits were
continued on the following days until the 16th of the same
month, after which Coventry was liberated. The stir his
imprisonment had made, and the number of visitors who
called upon him--in one day some sixty coaches stood
waiting outside the Tower Gates for those who called on
Sir William--had much annoyed the King, the Duke of
York, and Buckingham. Sir William Coventry, of whom
Bishop Burnet writes that he was "a man of great notions
and eminent virtue; the best speaker in the House of
Commons, and capable of bearing the chief ministry, as it
was once thought he was very near it, and deserved it more
than all the rest did," after this quarrel with Buckingham
and his imprisonment in the Tower retired from public
affairs, going to Minster Lovel in Oxfordshire, and dying
at the age of sixty, in 1686. He had been Secretary of
-----File: 111.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: COLL[**' ?] BLOOD[** F1 within illus.]

<i>Colonel Blood.</i>

(<i>From a Contemporary Engraving.</i>)]
-----File: 112.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 113.png---------------------------------------------------------
the Admiralty, and twice member for Yarmouth, and in
1667 had been one of the Commission of the Treasury.

There is a blank in the list of commitments to the Tower
between the years 1668 and 1678. They are supposed to
have been lost, but we know that the year after Pepys'
friend Sir John Robinson had ceased to command in the
Tower, the gossiping diarist himself was a prisoner
within the walls, having been in some way concerned in
the so-called Popish Plot of 1679. It is greatly to be
deplored that no account of Samuel's experiences in the
Tower have come down to us, for his diary ends ten years
before this date: Pepys was in the Tower from the month
of May 1679 until the following February. His expenses,
however, have been recorded:--"For safe keeping of Sir
Anthony Deane and Mr Pepys, from and for the 22nd
day of May 1679 unto and for the 24th of June 1679,
being four weeks and six dayes, at £3 per week, ancient
allowance, and 13s. 4d. per weeke, present demands,
according to the retrenchments, £6, 9s. 6d." (Bayley's
"Tower of London.")

Among other prisoners in the Tower in this reign was
Nathaniel Desborow, or Disbrew, as his name is sometimes
written. Desborow was Cromwell's brother-in-law,
"clumsy and ungainly in his person," and, a born plotter,
he hated all who were placed above him. He had been
made Chancellor of Ireland by his nephew Richard
Cromwell, but nevertheless he helped to pull down the
Protector's son and successor from his short-lived position.
There were many others besides, imprisoned for political
and non-political offences, and of the latter was Stephen
Thomson, who was imprisoned for "stealing and conveying
beyond the seas the sole daughter and heiress of Sir
Edmund Alleyn, deceased, she being an infant."

The most sensational event that occurred in the Tower
during the reign of Charles II. was the attempt made by
a ruffian who called himself "Colonel" Blood to steal the
Crown and Regalia. Blood, half sailor, half highwayman,
-----File: 114.png---------------------------------------------------------
and a complete scoundrel, was about fifty years old when,
in the month of May 1671, he made what was literally a
dash for the Crown. Blood appears to have served under
Cromwell, and consequently styled himself "Colonel";
after the war he became a spy of the Government, and
a short time before his performance at the Tower he had
almost succeeded in having the old Duke of Ormond
hanged on the gallows at Tyburn.

At this time Sir Gilbert Talbot held the appointment
of "Master of the Jewel House." The allowance for
this charge had been reduced, and, as a kind of compensation,
the Master had permission to allow the public
to inspect the Regalia, then kept in the Martin Tower,
or Jewel Tower, as it was then called, a fee being charged
which became the Master's perquisite. Three weeks before
Blood made his attempt, he had called at the Martin
Tower disguised as a clergyman, "with a long cloak,
cassock, and canonical girdle." He was accompanied by
a woman whom he represented as his wife. The lady
requested permission to see the Regalia, but soon after
being admitted to the Tower complained of "a qualm
upon her stomach," and old Talbot Edwards, who had
been an old servant of Sir Gilbert's, and had been placed
by him in charge of the Regalia, called to his wife to
look after the <i>soi-disant</i> Mrs Blood. That lady having
been given something to remove her "qualms" was,
together with her husband, most profuse in the expression
of her gratitude to the old keeper and his wife, and
promised to return upon an early occasion.

The next time Blood came to the Tower he was
alone, bringing some gloves for Edwards's wife as a
token of gratitude for the kindness shown to "Mrs
Blood." On this occasion he informed Edwards that
he had a young nephew who was well off, and in search
of a wife, and suggested that a match might be arranged
between him and their daughter. Blood was invited to
bring his nephew to make the acquaintance of the young
-----File: 115.png---------------------------------------------------------
lady, and it was arranged that the old couple should give
a dinner at which the meeting should take place. At the
dinner Blood took it upon himself, being still in his clerical
disguise, to say grace, which he did with great unction,
concluding with a long-winded oration, and a prayer for
the Royal family. After the meal he visited the rooms
in the Tower, and seeing a fine pair of pistols hanging
on the wall, asked if he might buy them to give to a
friend. He then said that he would return with a couple
of friends who were about to leave London, and who were
anxious to see the Regalia before leaving, it being decided
that he should bring them the next morning. That day
was the 9th of May, and at seven in the morning old
Talbot Edwards was ready to receive his reverend friend
and his companions, who soon put in an appearance.
Blood and his confederates had arms concealed about
them, each carrying daggers, pocket pistols, and rapier
blades in their canes.

They were taken up the stairs into the room where
the Regalia was kept, but immediately they had entered,
the ruffians threw a cloak over Edwards's head and gagged
him with a wooden plug, which had a small hole in it so
that the person gagged could breathe; this they fastened
with a piece of waxed leather which encircled his neck,
and placed an iron hook on his nose so as to prevent
him from crying out. They swore they would murder
him if he attempted to give an alarm--which the poor
old fellow could scarcely have done under the circumstances.
But the plucky old keeper struggled hard,
whereupon they beat him upon the head with a wooden
mallet, and stabbed him until he fainted. The villains,
thinking they had killed him, then turned their attention
to rifling the treasures in the room. One of them, Parrot,
put the orb in his breeches pocket, Blood placed the
Crown under his cloak, and the third began to file the
sceptre in two pieces, it being too long to carry away
without being seen. At this moment steps were heard;
-----File: 116.png---------------------------------------------------------
Edwards's young son having just returned from Flanders
in the very nick of time. The thieves dashed down the
stairs past the young man who was coming up, carrying
with them the orb and crown, the sceptre being left
behind in the hurry of their flight. The pursuit was
immediate; young Edwards had brought with him his
brother-in-law, a Captain Beckman, and the latter hearing
cries of "Treason! Murder!" from the terrified women
in the Tower, and the cry "The Crown is stolen!" rushed
after Blood and the two other men. These had meanwhile
crossed the drawbridge between the Main Guard
at the White Tower and the Wharf; at the bridge a
warder had tried to stop them, but Blood fired his pistol,
and the man, although not wounded, fell to the ground,
and they dashed past him. At St Katharine's Gate, near
which horses were in waiting for the thieves, Beckman
overtook them; Blood again discharged his pistol but
missed his pursuer, who ducking his head, promptly
seized the sham clergyman, from under whose cloak the
Crown fell to the ground, rolling in the gutter. Then
followed what the <i>London Gazette</i> of the day called a
"robustious struggle," Blood ultimately being secured,
remarking that "It was a gallant attempt, for it was for
a Crown!"

When the Crown fell to the ground, some of the
gems came loose from their settings, and a large ruby,
which had belonged to the sceptre, was found in Parrot's
pocket. Little harm, however, was done, except to the
poor old keeper, who was nearly eighty years of age and
had been terribly injured; he was soon past all suffering,
and was buried in the Chapel of St Peter's, where his
gravestone can still be seen.

After his capture Blood occupied a prison in the
White Tower for a short time, but the King soon sent
for him. And although it is not, and cannot be known,
whether Charles was an accessory or not in the attempted
theft, or whether Blood knew too much of the King's affairs,
-----File: 117.png---------------------------------------------------------
yet, whatever the reason, Blood was not only pardoned but
rewarded, the King giving him a pension of £500 a
year, and bestowing upon him landed estates in Ireland,
the "Colonel" becoming one of the most assiduous of
the Whitehall courtiers. Whether Charles also rewarded
Blood's accomplices is not recorded, but none of them
were ever punished for the attempted robbery. John
Evelyn recounts meeting Blood at court on the 10th
of May 1671. "How he came to be pardoned," he writes,
"and ever received into favour, not only after this but
several other exploits almost as daring, both in Ireland
and here, I never could come to understand. This man
had not only a daring, but a villainous unmerciful look,
a false countenance, but very well-spoken, and dangerously
insinuating."

Charles the Second, always in want of money, might
very possibly have commissioned Blood, after he had
stolen the Crown, to pawn or sell its gems in Holland
or elsewhere, and the thieves could then have divided the
spoil. There can be little doubt that had not young
Edwards and his brother-in-law arrived at the Tower
when they did, Blood and the two, or others, would have
got safely away with the jewels. The plot had been
admirably planned, and only the accident of the return of
the keeper's son, which Blood could not possibly have
foreseen, prevented its successful accomplishment.

In later years Blood is said to have become a Quaker--not
a desirable recruit for that most respectable body,
one would imagine. He died in 1680, and has had the
honour of having had his bold, bad face placed in the
National Portrait Gallery; it fully bears out Evelyn's
description of the "villainous unmerciful" look of the man.

A very different individual from Blood, who was also
in the Tower about the same time, was William Penn, the
founder of Pennsylvania. He had been imprisoned for no
offence, unless that of writing a pamphlet on Unitarianism
could be considered a punishable crime. William Penn's
-----File: 118.png---------------------------------------------------------
father, the celebrated Admiral, Sir William, had accused
the Duke of York of showing cowardice in a sea fight with
the Dutch, and the son's pamphlet was made the stick
with which to beat the father. Young Penn passed some
months in the Tower, where he wrote his famous work,
"No Cross, no Crown." Edward Stillingfleet, Bishop of
Worcester, was sent to the Tower to see, and to convert,
the young Quaker from his errors in belief, but Penn
only said to the prelate: "The Tower is to me the worst
argument in the world," and Stillingfleet found that he
could make no impression.

In 1678, William Howard, Viscount Stafford, a Roman
Catholic peer, was accused of being concerned in the
Popish Plot, that monstrous tangle of lies, invented, for the
greater part, by the infamous Titus Oates. Stafford was
accused by Oates, with four other Roman Catholic peers,
of being mixed up in the plot to overthrow the King, and
to place the Duke of York upon the throne. From his
place in the House of Lords Stafford had declared his
innocence of the charge, but he was committed to close
imprisonment in the Tower in the month of October
(1678), remaining a prisoner until the month of November
1680, when he was tried at Westminster Hall, Titus
Oates being the principal witness against him. In
Reresby's "Memoirs" it is said that Charles wished to save
Stafford, whom he knew to be innocent; but his mistress,
the Duchess of Portsmouth, whom Reresby believed to
have been bribed, prevented the King from acting in the
matter as he would otherwise have done, and Charles
allowed an innocent man to be judicially murdered in order
not to thwart his mistress's wishes. Stafford was beheaded
on Tower Hill on the 29th of December 1680, the crowd
hooting him on his way to the scaffold, for Titus Oates's
infamous accusations had made any Roman Catholic an
object of hatred to the populace. On Stafford asking one
of the Sheriffs, of the name of Cornish, to interfere, the
latter brutally replied: "I am ordered to stop no man's
-----File: 119.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>William, Lord Russell.</i>

(<i>From the Portrait in the National Portrait Gallery</i>[**)]]
-----File: 120.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 121.png---------------------------------------------------------
mouth but your own." So fervently, however, did Stafford
proclaim his innocence on the scaffold, that many of the
spectators, "with heads uncovered, exclaimed: 'We
believe you, God bless you, my Lord!'" "He perished,"
writes Sir J. Reresby, "in the firmest denial of what had
been laid to his charge, and that in so cogent and persuasive
a manner, that all the beholders believed his words,
and grieved his destiny." The same tribunal which had
condemned Stafford, three years after his death reversed
the attainder they had pronounced against him, it having,
in the meanwhile, been proved that Stafford had perished
an innocent man, done to death by the false witness of the
villain Oates. Lord Stafford was buried in the Chapel of
St Peter's.

The Rye House Plot brought two of the best and
noblest heads in England to the block--William, Lord
Russell, and Algernon Sidney. Both suffered death for
the good cause of the liberty of England. Russell was the
proto-martyr in that faith, Sidney the second.

England under Charles the Second was fast drifting
back into the worst of the tyrannies that had darkened
her former history. The King, as he proved on his
death-bed, was a Roman Catholic in religion, and although
professing to belong to the Church of England, moved in
the steps of his brother James, who was an avowed Papist;
and the country was rapidly becoming, politically, a dependency
of the French King, and, in religion, a fief of
the Pope. The four most conspicuous Englishmen who
clearly saw the danger that threatened the freedom, both
civil and religious, of England, and who had done their
utmost to save their country--patriots in the best sense
of that much-abused term, were at the time of the discovery
of the Rye House Plot in 1683, either out of the
country or in prison.

Shaftesbury, after an imprisonment of five weeks in
the Tower, had crossed to Holland after his liberation in
November 1681. The news of his acquittal had been re-*
-----File: 122.png---------------------------------------------------------
*ceived with great rejoicings in the city, Reresby writing
that "the rabble lighted bonfires." The Duke of York,
according to Lenthall, expressed his indignation publicly
at "such insolent defiance of authority such as he had
never before known." But Shaftesbury's friends and
admirers had a medal struck in honour of his liberation,
on one side being the Earl's portrait in profile, and on the
other a view of London taken from the Southwark side
of the Thames, with the sun casting its rays over the
Tower from out the clouds; above is inscribed the word,
"Laetamur," with the date 24 of November 1681 beneath.
This medal gave rise to Dryden's satirical poem called
"The Medal," in which he compares Shaftesbury to
Achitophel.

Russell, Sidney, and Essex were arrested and placed
in the prisons of the Tower. They suffered death in the
cause of constitutional liberty, as against the arbitrary
power of the King, and also for wishing to exclude the
Duke of York from the succession to the throne after his
brother's death. This plan was quite distinct from the
Rye House Plot--a plot that arranged for the assassination
of the King and the Duke of York on their road to
Newmarket races.

Russell and Sidney were betrayed by Lord Howard
of Escrick, and although warned of his danger, Russell,
unlike Shaftesbury, refused to flee, saying he had done
nothing to make him fear meeting the justice of his
country. However, on entering the Tower, he seems to
have had a foreboding of his fate, for turning round to
his attendant, Taunton, he said he knew that there was
"a determination against him to take his life, for the devil
is unchained." "From the moment of his arrest," writes
Bishop Burnet, "he looked upon himself as a dying man,
and turned his thoughts wholly to another world. He read
much in the Scriptures, particularly in the Psalms. But,
whilst he behaved with the serenity of a man prepared
for death, his friends exhibited an honourable anxiety to
-----File: 123.png---------------------------------------------------------
save his life. Lord Essex would not leave his house, lest
his absconding might incline a jury to give more credit
to the evidence against Lord Russell. The Duke of
Monmouth offered to come in and share fortunes with
him, if it would do him any service. But he answered,
'It would be of no advantage to him to have his friends
die with him.'"

During the fortnight which elapsed between his arrest
and his sentence, Russell's devoted wife did all that was
humanly possible to save her husband's life, and the night
before the trial she wrote to him: "Your friends believe
I can do you some service at your trial. I am certainly
willing to try; my resolution will hold out, pray let yours.
But it may be the Court will not let me. However, do
let me try." Lady Russell not only tried, but succeeded
in being of assistance to her husband during his trial,
which took place in Westminster Hall on July 13th, 1683.
Lord Russell asked his judges if he might have "some
one to help his memory," as he put it, and the request
being granted, "My wife," he said, "is here to do it."
And all through that long summer day, whilst he was
being tried for his life, Lady Russell sat by her husband's
side writing down notes of the evidence, and giving him
her advice. When the news came, during the course of
the trial, that Essex had been found in the Tower with
his throat cut, Russell burst into tears. He wept for the
fate of his friend, whilst his own misfortunes only made
him appear the more serene and indifferent to the malice
of his enemies. Jeffries, who presided, took care in his
charge to the jury to turn Essex's untimely end into an
additional proof of Russell's guilt.

Essex had been arrested soon after Russell, and on
the same charge, that of being concerned in the Rye House
Plot, and was accused of high treason. Taken from his
seat at Cassiobury to the Tower, he was placed in the
same room which was occupied by his father. It is described
in the depositions placed before the Commissioners
-----File: 124.png---------------------------------------------------------
in William the Third's time, as being "on the left hand
as you go up the mound, after passing the Bloody Tower
Gate." In Dalrymple's history it is stated that Essex was
confined in the same room which his father, Lord Capel,
had occupied, and in which Lady Essex's grandfather, the
Earl of Northumberland, had killed himself in Elizabeth's
reign. To this prison Essex was brought in the month
of July in the year 1683--a year so fatal to some of
England's truest patriots--and there, as has already been
stated, he was found with his throat cut. Whether Essex
died by his own hand, or by the hands of others, will
never be known. On the whole, the evidence points to
suicide; and this is the opinion of the most trustworthy
authorities, such as Green and Gardiner.

Arthur Capel, Earl of Essex, had been one of the most
popular of the liberal leaders in the country. He had held
high offices in the State, he had been Ambassador from
the court of Charles II. to that of Copenhagen, he had
been Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, and, for a short time,
Prime Minister. The only son of the gallant Lord Capel
of Hadham, who had been executed by Cromwell, Essex
had every reason to expect some gratitude from the son
of the man for whose sake his father had given his life.
But with the Stuarts the sense of gratitude was an unknown
quantity, and Essex was doomed to share the fates
of his friends, Russell and Sidney, accused by the same
traitor who had betrayed both them and himself. On the
day of Essex's death, the King and his brother James had
been visiting the Tower, a place in which neither of them
had set foot for a dozen years. After James's flight at
the Revolution, it was eagerly believed that this visit was
in some way connected with Essex's death. In a curious
contemporary print, Essex is seen being murdered by
three well-dressed individuals, the position in which his
body was found after death being also shown at the same
time. In the depositions alluded to above, the sentry at
the prison door stated that two men had entered the room
-----File: 125.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Arthur Comte d'Essex</i>]
-----File: 126.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 127.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Gate and Portcullis in the Bloody Tower</i>]
-----File: 128.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 129.png---------------------------------------------------------
on the morning of the Earl's death, that an alarm was
given by Essex's valet when he found his master's body on
the floor of the closet next his bedroom with his throat cut.
Two children deposed that they had seen a hand throwing
a razor out of the Earl's window, that a woman then left
the house and picked it up. A sentry, named Robert
Meek, who had made some remarks tending to prove that
Essex had met with foul play, was found dead soon afterwards
in the Tower moat.

Bad and heartless as were both the King and his
brother James, none can believe that they would commit
a cold-blooded murder themselves; and had they hired
others to do so, the fact of the brothers having gone that
same morning to the fortress gives the idea of murder
high improbability, and Essex's death will remain one
of the many unsolved tragic mysteries of the Tower. That
the authorities believed the theory of suicide is proved by
the register of St Peter's in the Tower, in which is the
following entry: "Arthur, Earl of Essex, cutt his own
throat within the Tower, July 13, 1683. Buried in this
Chapel."

But to return to Lord Russell. After his condemnation,
and during the few days that were left to him on
earth, Russell was visited by Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury,
as well as by Bishop Burnet, both of whom urged him to
sign a paper declaring his adherence to the principle of
non-resistance, which they declared to be an article of
Christian faith. Russell said, in answer, that he had
always believed in the right of a nation to defend its
religion and liberties when they were threatened, expressing
his willingness to give up his life in their defence;
and if he erred in this, "God," he said, "would forgive
him, as it would be the sin of ignorance." He also told
the prelates that both he and Lady Russell were agreed
on this subject, and that nothing could alter their views.
Lady Russell was fighting in these days to save the life
she valued far above her own; but all was useless; it was
-----File: 130.png---------------------------------------------------------
a hopeless struggle. "I wish," said Lord Russell, "that
my wife would give over beating every bush for my preservation";
but he added, "if it will be any consolation
for her after my death to have done her utmost to save me
I cannot blame her."

On the 19th of July, two days before the day fixed for
his execution, Russell wrote a letter to the King that was
not to be delivered to Charles until after the writer's death.
In that letter he assured the monarch that "he had always
acted for the best interests of the Crown, and that if he
had been mistaken he hoped the King's displeasure would be
satisfied with his death, and would not extend to his widow
and children." The following day he received the Blessed
Sacrament from Tillotson. "Do you believe all the
Articles of the Christian Faith as taught by the Church of
England?" asked the Dean; and Russell assenting, "Do
you," continued the Dean, "forgive all your enemies?"
"With all my heart," answered Russell. Then after
reading and signing the paper which he intended to give
to the Sheriff on the scaffold--his farewell to his country--Russell
sent for his wife, who came at once, bringing with
her their three children. "Stay and sup with me," he said
to her, "let us eat our last earthly food together." At
ten o'clock that night the parting between these two took
place. "Both," writes Burnet, "were silent and trembling,
their eyes full of tears which did not overflow. When she
had left, 'Now,' said he, 'the bitterness of death is past.'
Then he broke down: 'What a blessing she has been to
me, and what a misery it would have been if she had been
crying to me to turn informer and to be a Lord Howard.'
And then he praised his devoted wife to the good Bishop
as she deserved to be praised, for a nobler, more loyal or
devoted wife than Rachel, Lady Russell, is not to be found
in all history."

Some of the things Russell said to Burnet on that last
evening of his life are well worth recording. Speaking of
death he said, "What a great change death made, and
-----File: 131.png---------------------------------------------------------
how wonderfully those new scenes would strike on a soul."
He had heard, he told Burnet, "how some persons who
had been born blind were struck when, by the couching of
their cataracts, they obtained their sight; but what," said
he, "if the first thing they saw were the rising sun?"

Lincoln's Inn Fields was the place chosen for his
execution, the scaffold being erected not far from his own
house. This was on the 29th of July, and when the
Sheriffs arrived to take him they found Russell quietly
winding up his watch. "Now," he said, "I have done with
time, and must think henceforward of Eternity." He then
gave the watch as a souvenir to Burnet, that good old
Bishop of Salisbury who had clung so closely to his friend
in his trials as to a beloved brother, and to whom we owe
the touching account of that friend's last days upon earth.

On the 7th of December of this same year, Algernon
Sidney was executed on Tower Hill, having been condemned
to death by a picked jury and the infamous Chief-Justice
Jeffreys, on the trumped-up charge of conspiring
against the life of Charles; only one witness appeared
against him, but he was condemned by his writings, which
were certainly strongly republican; yet, considering what
the rule of the second Charles had become, a man of
Algernon Sidney's lofty spirit, with his love of freedom,
could not have written or thought otherwise. It has been
well said of him that not only did he write from his
judgment but also from his heart, and he informed his
readers of that which he felt as well as that which he
knew. He was condemned principally for the treatise in
which he advocated the rights of subjects, under certain
contingencies, to depose their king, and although this
paper had never been published, or, in fact, printed, it was
sufficient material for Jeffreys, who bullied the jury into a
committal against Sidney. Algernon Sidney's life had
been as noble as was his name, but his unbending
republican principles had made him the <i>bête noire</i> of both
Charles and James, and any evidence by which he could
-----File: 132.png---------------------------------------------------------
be entrapped into a charge of treason was welcome to
them. When he came forth from the Tower to die in the
cause of liberty, "Englishmen," as Dalrymple has finely
written, "wept not for him as they had done for Lord
Russell, their pulses beat high, their hearts swelled, they
felt an unusual grandeur and elevation of mind whilst they
looked upon him." One of the Sheriffs asked Sidney if
it was his intention to make a speech upon the scaffold,
to which he answered, "I have made my peace with God,
and have nothing to say to man," adding, "I am ready to
die, and will give you no further trouble." His last
prayers were for "the good old cause." When his head
lay on the block, the executioner asked him if he would
raise it again. "Not till the general resurrection; strike
on!" And these were Algernon Sidney's last words.
-----File: 133.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 134.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>James, Duke of Monmouth.</i>

(<i>From a Contemporary Engraving.</i>)]
-----File: 135.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XV

JAMES II.


During the four years in which James the Second mis-*governed
England, the most interesting events connected
with the Tower were the tragedy of the Duke of Monmouth's
death, and the imprisonment of the Seven Bishops.

James was the first of our sovereigns to omit passing
the night previous to his coronation in the Tower, and
the fortress now ceased entirely to be a royal residence,
being given over to the uses which it still fulfils.

After the Duke of Monmouth's capture near the New
Forest, on the 13th of July 1685, after his luckless attempt
to wrest the Crown from James at Sedgemoor, he, with
Lord Grey of Wark, was brought to London and imprisoned
in the Tower, the warrant for his committal
being thus worded: "James, Duke of Monmouth, 13
July, for High Treason in levying war against the King
and assuming a title to the Crown." Monmouth had
married Lady Anne Scott, daughter of the Earl of
Buccleuch, when he was only fourteen years of age, but
the union does not appear to have been a happy one.
When the Duchess came to take her last leave of him
after his condemnation, the interview is said "to have
passed with decency, but without tokens of affection";
the prisoner's heart was elsewhere. Monmouth had no
lack of clergymen to see him pass out of the world at
the close of his short and wasted life, for during the day
and night before he died, four ecclesiastics were in attendance
upon him, and they never left him till the end.
-----File: 136.png---------------------------------------------------------
These were Tenison, then Vicar of St Martin's-in-the-Fields,
but afterwards Bishop of Lincoln, and Primate;
Turner, Bishop of Rochester; Hooper, afterwards Bishop
of Bath and Wells; and the saint-like Thomas Ken, Bishop
of Bath and Wells. When Tenison reproached the Duke
for the want of feeling he had shown towards his wife,
Monmouth replied that "his heart was turned against
her, because in his affliction she had gone to the play
and into public companies, by which I knew she did not
love me." The woman he loved best, and with whom
he had been living, was Lady Harriet Wentworth, the
daughter of Lord Cleveland.

Accompanied by the four clergymen, Monmouth left
the Tower on the morning of the 15th of July, at ten
o'clock; the writ for the delivery of the Duke's body to
the Sheriffs is still to be seen in the Record Office, being
addressed to Sir William Gostling and Sir Peter Vander-*patt,
and endorsed by them on receiving the Duke from
the charge of the Lieutenant of the Tower.

Monmouth passed on foot through a lane of soldiers,
preceded by three officers, who carried pistols and accompanied
him on to the scaffold. The Duke's appearance
caused a commotion in the crowd which had come to
see him die; he had always been a favourite with the
people, his personal beauty probably being the principal
reason for his popularity; and he was also regarded as
a kind of hero on the Protestant side, as opposed to
James the Second and the Romish priests. The populace
had recently given him the title of "King Monmouth."

The scaffold was all draped in black. Monmouth made
no speech to the people, but only conversed with the clergymen
near him; but he had prepared the following statement,
written on a sheet of paper, which he gave to one
of the Bishops:--"I declare that the title of King was
forced upon me, and that it was very much contrary to
my opinion when I was proclaimed. For the satisfaction
of the world I do declare that the late King told me he
-----File: 137.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Execution of the Duke of Monmouth, July, 1685.</i>]
-----File: 138.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 139.png---------------------------------------------------------
was never married to my mother. Having declared this,
I hope that the King who is now, will not let my children
suffer on this account. And to this I put my hand this
15 July 1685. Monmouth." This extraordinary statement
was also signed by the four clerics and the two
Sheriffs.

"Pray do your business well," Monmouth said to Jack
Ketch, the headsman. "Do not serve me as you did my
Lord Russell. I have heard you struck him four or five
times; if you strike me twice, I cannot promise you not
to stir." Unfortunately poor Monmouth was even worse
served by the executioner than Russell had been, and it
was not until the blows had been repeated five times
that the once beautiful head was separated from the
body. Jack Ketch was almost torn to pieces by the
horrified and furious mob.

It is almost incredible to believe, did one not know
the baseness of James's character, that he had two
medals struck in commemoration of Monmouth's execution--"savage
medals," as they were appropriately called.
"Thus," writes John Evelyn of Monmouth's death,
"ended this quondam Duke, darling of his father, and
the ladies, being extremely handsome and adroit; an
excellent soldier and dancer, a favourite of the people,
of an easy nature, seduced by knaves, who would have
set him up only to make a property, and taken the
opportunity of the King being of another religion, to gather
a party of discontented men. He failed and perished,
had a virtuous and excellent lady that brought him great
riches and a second Dukedom in Scotland."

The son of that Marquis of Argyll who had raised
the standard of rebellion in Scotland in conjunction with
Monmouth's rising in England, and who was beheaded
in Edinburgh in the same year, was a prisoner in the
Tower for some weeks. The following is the entry with
reference to him taken from the Tower records:--"25
June 1685. Archibald Campbell, son to the late Marquis
-----File: 140.png---------------------------------------------------------
of Argyll, upon suspicion of dangerous practices to the
State. Signed by his Majesty's command. Sunderland."
The young man was, however, discharged on the 19th of
the following October. After his liberation he went to
Holland, returning to England with William III., when
he was created first Duke of Argyll.

The Stuarts had solemnly vowed to rule England in
the Reformed and Protestant faith, but within a quarter
of a century of their restoration, the Church of Rome had
not only been allowed by them to recover many of its
privileges, but Roman Catholicism had become the religion
of the King and court. James had set aside the Test
Act, a measure passed by Parliament in 1663, which
required every individual in the civil and military employment
of the State to take the oath of supremacy and
allegiance, to declare against the doctrine of transsubstantiation[**transubstantiation],
and to declare in favour of the doctrine
of the Sacrament as taught by the Church of England.
By annulling this act James re-admitted Roman Catholics
to any office in the country, both in civil and military
situations. Four Roman Catholic peers were added to
the Privy Council; priests and Jesuits flocked into the
country in great numbers, and Mass was publicly celebrated
in the Chapel Royal. London again saw the almost
forgotten costumes of the different religious orders, the
brown-robed Franciscans, and the white-robed Carmelites,
whilst the Jesuit priests opened a school at the Savoy.
At the same time the King added largely to the standing
army, and a camp of thirteen thousand men was established
at Hounslow, destined, if James thought necessary, to keep
the capital in check. Whilst James was thus trying to
coerce his subjects to the Roman Catholic religion, the
Protestants across the Channel were being persecuted by
Louis; for by a strange coincidence--if not by a prearranged
plan--the same year that saw the violation of
the Test Act in England, witnessed the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes in France, with the result that
-----File: 141.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Contemporary Portraits of</i>

<i>The Duke of Monmouth & others.</i>]
-----File: 142.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 143.png---------------------------------------------------------
thousands of French reformers were driven from their
homes and crossed to England--a living proof of the
curse that a bigoted and arbitrary ruler could be to his
subjects.

In the succeeding year, 1686, James attempted to gag
the English Church. The King had appointed two Roman
Catholic priests to high preferments--Massey to the
Deanery of Christ Church, and Parker to the See of
Oxford; and when the English clergy protested from their
pulpits against these appointments, James summoned an
Ecclesiastical Commission, at the head of which he placed
Jeffreys. The first action of this Commission was to
suspend Compton, Bishop of London, who had refused
to suspend the Dean of Norwich (Sharpe), one of the
offending preachers against the Papist appointments made
by the King.

In 1687 Oxford had the high honour of bringing about
the Revolution, which saved England from a fresh tyranny
and led to the final overthrow of the Stuart princes.

James intended to place a Roman Catholic, of the name
of Farmer, over the Fellows at Magdalen College; but the
College, instead of accepting this nominee of the King, chose
one of their number, Hough, for their head. Whereupon,
the Ecclesiastical Court, with Jeffreys at its head, declared
the Magdalen election null and void, and Parker, the
Bishop of Oxford, James's nominee to that see, was forced
upon Magdalen as its President. Parker died in 1688,
and James again appointed a Roman Catholic bishop <i>in
partibus</i>, Bonaventure Giffard, to take his place. Previously,
the King had visited Oxford, and after abusing the
Fellows for their independence, had expelled five-and-twenty
of them. These arbitrary measures led to a clerical
revolt throughout England. In the April of the following
year, James issued a form of indulgence, which he ordered
to be read in all the churches. By this form the King
hoped to unite the Roman Catholics with the Protestant
Nonconformists under the banner of "liberty of conscience"
-----File: 144.png---------------------------------------------------------
against the Church, and thus make the Church herself
assist in her own defeat by the use of his ecclesiastical
supremacy (Wakeman's "History of the Church of
England").

The clergy protested, and six bishops, with Sancroft,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, at their head, drew up a
petition to the King, protesting against the form. The
petition was most humble; it stated that the petitioners
considered this Declaration of Indulgence to religious
dissenters to be founded "upon such a dispensing power
as hath often been declared illegal by Parliament, and
particularly in the years 1662 and 1672, and in the
beginning of your Majesty's reign; and in a matter of so
great moment and consequence to the whole nation, both
in Church and State, your petitioners cannot, in providence,
honour, or conscience, so far make themselves parties to
it as the distributors of it all over the nation, and the
solemn publication of it once again, even in God's House,
and in the time of Divine Service, must amount to in
common and reasonable contention."

The King read the petition, scowled, and returned it
to Sancroft, saying angrily: "I did not expect this from
the Church of England!" adding, "If I change my mind
you shall hear from me; if not, I shall expect my commands
shall be obeyed."

Three weeks afterwards the Bishops and the Archbishop
were summoned to appear before the Privy Council.
Jeffreys insolently inquired whether they were ready to
give recognisances to be tried for misdemeanours before
the Court of the King's Bench, and waiving their plea
of being Peers of Parliament, he refused the prelates bail,
and had them committed to the Tower. In order to avoid
the demonstration in the Bishops' favour, which both James
and Jeffreys dreaded if they were taken through the streets
of the city, they were conveyed to the Tower in the royal
barge along the river. But their passage to the fortress
was one long ovation, and as the barge approached the
-----File: 145.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Seven Bishops,[**. ?]</i>

(<i>From a Contemporary Print.</i>)]
-----File: 146.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 147.png---------------------------------------------------------
Tower, numbers of people rushed knee-deep into the water
to receive the blessing of the prelates, and, on their arrival,
even the warders received them kneeling at the landing-place.

As the Seven Bishops passed under St Thomas's Tower,
and landed at the Traitor's Gate, the bells of St Peter's
Chapel were ringing for evening service. Passing over
the green, they entered the chapel and attended the service.
The appropriateness of the second lesson struck all
who were present, being a chapter in the 2nd of Corinthians--"Giving
no offence in anything, that the ministry be not
blamed: but in all things approving ourselves as the
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in distresses,
in imprisonments."

A most uncomfortable week must have been passed
by these Reverend Fathers of the Church in the Tower,
for they were all crowded together in the by no means
spacious Martin Tower. On the 15th of June they were
taken from the Tower to the bar of the Court of King's
Bench--on this occasion they were admitted to bail.
Their trial began a fortnight later, taking place in Westminster
Hall, and was one of the most memorable of the
great historic events that that building has witnessed.
When the verdict of "Not guilty" was pronounced, the
old oak roof of William Rufus's hall re-echoed with the
shouts of the people gathered below; it was a moment, as
Wakeman has eloquently written in his "History of the
Church of England," "unparalleled in the history of
English courts of law. The crowd within and without
Westminster Hall broke into a frenzy of enthusiastic joy.
Men fell upon each other's necks, and wept and shouted
and laughed and wept again; and amid the cheers of
men and the boom of cannon the heroes of the Church
passed in safety to their homes."

The names of these seven "humble heroes" who had
so nobly stood up in defence of the rights of the Church
of England and of the liberty of their land, were Sancroft,
-----File: 148.png---------------------------------------------------------
the Primate; Thomas Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells;
William Lloyd, Bishop of St Asaph's; John Lake, Bishop
of Chichester; Thomas White, Bishop of Peterborough;
Jonathan Trelawney, Bishop of Bristol; and Francis
Turner, Bishop of Ely. Sancroft had been promoted from
the Deanery of St Paul's to Canterbury after the death
of Archbishop Sheldon, and had helped much in the
rebuilding of St Paul's. He left a fine library to Emmanuel
College, Cambridge, of which he had been master.
Thomas Ken was famous for his unaffected piety, and the
beautiful hymn he composed. Lloyd helped Bishop Burnet
to write his "History of the Reformation." Lake had
fought in the army of Charles I., and had been Bishop of
Man and Bishop of Bristol, before occupying the See of
Chichester; Trelawney was successively Bishop of Bristol,
Exeter, and Winchester; and Francis Turner had been
Dean of Winchester, a position he had held, together
with the Bishopric of Rochester, before being preferred
to Ely.

Compared with these men the State prisoners in the
Tower in the reign of James II. were not of much interest.
After Monmouth's rebellion, Lord Stamford, with Lord
Delamere and Charles Gerrard, "commonly called Lord
Bandon," were prisoners in the fortress. Sir Robert
Cotton and John Crewe Offleigh were in the Tower
charged with "dangerous and treasonable practices," and
also Mr J. Cook, a member of the House of Commons,
"for his indecent and undutiful speech, reflecting on the
King and the House of Commons."

A strange case was that of Sir Bevil Skelton, who was
a prisoner in September 1688, and "who had been recalled
from France for exceeding his instructions in certain
political transactions," for not only was he speedily
released, but was made Governor of the Tower, an
appointment which caused much dissatisfaction. This
appointment was the last of James's unpopular acts, and
when, three months later, the King fled the country, the
-----File: 149.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Seven Bishops going by Water to the Tower.</i>]
-----File: 150.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 151.png---------------------------------------------------------
House of Lords removed Skelton from his post, and gave
the keys of the Tower into the custody of Lord Lucas.

On the 11th of December 1688, James left Whitehall,
a King without a crown, and as he crossed the Thames
to reach Lambeth, he dropped the Great Seal into the
river, hoping thereby that everything would fall into
confusion for the want of that symbol of legitimate
authority. The curious Dutch engraving representing
the amiable act of the last of our male Stuart monarchs
gives a view of old London Bridge, and the Tower
beyond, looming large against a wintry sky. On the
same day that James threw away the Great Seal of
England, his Lord Chancellor, the justly detested Jeffreys,
was taken, in the disguise of a common sailor, in a small
house at Wapping, as he was about to go on board a
collier which would have taken him to Hamburg. Once
in the power of the mob, Jeffreys' life was in deadly
peril, and he suffered severely at the hands of the people,
but was finally rescued and taken before the Lord Mayor,
who, poor man, died in a fit soon after the terrible
judge had been brought before him, more revolting in his
abject terror of death than even during the Bloody Assizes
in the West, when he had condemned shoals of men and
women to tortures and death with jibes and ghastly
pleasantry. Protected by two regiments of the City train-bands,
Jeffreys was taken into the Tower on the 12th
of December, and given in charge of Lord Lucas, the
Governor. The warrant of Jeffreys' arrest, which is
unique, is among the Tower records, and runs as follows:--"We,
the peers of this Realm, being assembled with
some of the Privy Council, do hereby will and require you
to take into your custody the body of George, Lord
Jeffreys (herewith sent to you), and to keep him safe
prisoner until further order; for which this shall be your
sufficient warrant." This warrant is signed by thirteen
peers, including the Bishop of Winchester.

James having fled, and the Great Seal being at the
-----File: 152.png---------------------------------------------------------
bottom of the Thames, there was no King or Parliament
existing at the time the warrant was made out.
Jeffreys was half dead with terror when the coach in which
he was taken to the Tower entered its gates. All the
way from the Mansion House he had implored the soldiers
about him to preserve him from the furious rabble that
surged around the carriage with ferocious cries of a well-merited
hatred. This brute, who had sent scores of
innocent people to the block and the gallows, who had
rejoiced, like the fiend he was, at the sufferings of his
victims as they left his presence for the gibbet, or the
plantations, to be sold as slaves, now attempted to excite
pity for himself amongst those persons who came to see
him in the Tower, by telling them that he had only acted
as he had done by the orders of King James, and that
James had chidden him for showing too much clemency.

Jeffreys was only forty years old when he was taken
to the Tower, but he soon wasted away, tormented, one
might imagine, by the spectres of those whom he had
destroyed, and of the thousands whom he had made
desolate. Whether he died from drinking brandy to excess
or not, is of little moment, but according to Oldnixon, his
body "continued to decay" until the 19th of April 1689,
when he died at the age of forty-one. He had been Chief-Justice
at thirty-five, and Lord Chancellor at thirty-seven.
No one looking at his portrait in the National Portrait
Gallery would imagine that the melancholy-looking and
distinguished young man, with his long, flowing wig, could
be the most cruel, vindictive, and unmerciful judge with
whom the English Bench has ever been cursed.
-----File: 153.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>de k: vlucht[**vhicht ?] by nacht uyt het hof met de seegels vant Rÿck</i>[**Ryck ?]:]
-----File: 154.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 155.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XVI

WILLIAM AND MARY


Only one prisoner of State suffered death during the
twelve years of the joint reigns of William of Orange and
Mary. This was Sir John Fenwick, who had been
implicated in a plot to assassinate William, and being found
guilty of high treason, was beheaded on Tower Hill on
28th January 1697.

There were, however, a number of more or less unfortunate
important State prisoners at different times in the
fortress, the most interesting of these being the future
Duke of Marlborough, for "abetting and adhering to their
Majesties' enemies." In Lord Wolseley's admirable history
of that great soldier's life, we read under the date of 5th
May 1697: "Marlborough was kept a close prisoner in the
Tower, no one being allowed to see him except by order
of the Secretary of State. His wife left the Princess Anne
at Sion House in order to be near him in town, and she
left no means untried to obtain his release. There still
exist many orders signed by Lord Nottingham granting her
permission to see him in prison, the earliest being dated
five days after his committal, and worded 'for this time
only.' A Mr Chudleigh was a frequent visitor; the first
order of admission given him was to see Marlborough in
presence of a warder, 'for this time only.' Later on, we
find an order addressed to Lord Lucas, the Constable of
the Tower, signifying the Queen's pleasure that friends
and relatives of the prisoners lately committed should
have access to them from time to time. They were sub-*
-----File: 156.png---------------------------------------------------------
*sequently allowed to dine together, when all dread of
invasion had passed away. Marlborough, in the Tower,
had fewer friends than ever, but his wife makes honourable
mention of Lord Bradford, who not only refused to sign
the warrant which committed him to prison, but paid him
a visit when there.... Writing to Lady Marlborough,
Princess Anne says: 'I hear Lord Marlborough is sent
to the Tower, and though I am certain they have nothing
against him, and expected by your letter it would be so,
yet I was struck when I was told of it, for methinks it is
a dismal thing to have one's friends sent to that place.'...
'At length, on June 15, Marlborough was brought
before the Court of King's Bench on a writ of habeas
corpus, and released from the Tower upon finding bail for
£6000 for his appearance when required.'" ("Life of
Marlborough," vol. ii.)

The same charge of "abetting and adhering to their
Majesties' enemies," upon which Marlborough had been
imprisoned, was brought against Lord Brudenell, the Earl of
Huntingdon, Sir Robert Thorold, and Colonel Langston.

In the same year the ruffianly head of the gang of
"Mohawks," Lord Mohun, who figures in Thackeray's
"Esmond," was twice in the Tower for having committed
two assassinations--the first, that of the actor William
Mountford, whom Mohun had murdered in a quarrel over
the celebrated actress, Mrs Bracegirdle; and the second,
when, with Edward, Earl of Warwick, he had helped to
kill one Richard Coate. In 1695, Sir Basil Firebrace was
in the Tower, as well as the Earls of Salisbury, Peterborough,
and Arran, with Lord Montgomery, all imprisoned
on the charge of being concerned in Jacobite plots. With
these were Sir Edward Hale, Sir Thomas Jenner, Lord
Castlemaine, Lord Forbes, Colonel Lumley, Captain
Shackerley, Lord Preston, Sir Richard Cleaver, Sir Robert
Hamilton, and Edward Griffin, upon whom James conferred
a barony whilst he was imprisoned in the Tower,
a title James had no more right to bestow than Griffin had
-----File: 157.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>View of the Tower in the time of James II[**. ?]</i>]
-----File: 158.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 159.png---------------------------------------------------------
to receive. Griffin, it seems, owed his imprisonment to
an accident. He was in active correspondence with the
court at St Germains, and had ordered a large pewter
bottle to be made with a false bottom, in which to conceal
letters. Late one night he gave this bottle to his cook
with directions to have it soldered. Whilst this was being
done, a packet of letters was discovered in the false
bottom directed to James II. The cook was immediately
seized, and Griffin, with his wife, was sent to the Tower,
whence, however, he made his escape, but soon afterwards
surrendered himself to the authorities. He died in the
Tower in 1710.

The affection and loyalty inspired by the Stuarts
brought many prisoners to the Tower, refusal to take the
oath of allegiance to the joint sovereigns being answered
by the authorities with confinement in the fortress, on the
charge of "abetting and adhering to their Majesties'
enemies." Of these, Francis Cholmondeley, Lord
Yarmouth, and some others, were there in 1690, the
names of Lords Newburgh, Clancarty, Tyrone, Morley,
Monteagle, Dartmouth, Cahir, the Earl of Clarendon,
Major-General Dorrington, and General Maxwell, also
figure on the list, but against these no specific charge is
now apparent. Two years afterwards a Mr Henry Grey,
a member of the House of Commons, was there, accused
of taking bribes, as well as Lord Falkland; and the Earl of
Torrington's defeat by the French fleet off Beachy Head
was punished by an enforced residence in the State prison.

That the fortress was crowded with prisoners towards
the close of William's reign is apparent by two papers
which, by the kindness of Mr Birch, the Curator of the
Soane Museum, I have been allowed to copy here, but it
must be added that out of all the State prisoners in the
Tower under William's rule only one suffered the extreme
penalty of the law. The papers are as follows:--
-----File: 160.png---------------------------------------------------------

/#
At the Committee for ye Affaires of Ireland in ye Councill Chamber att
Whitehall, Aprill the 15 1695.

It is ordered by their L^{dps} that Sir Christopher Wren Surveyr
Genl. of his Majities Works doe repaire to the Tower of London to
view Beauchamp Tower and Bloody Tower and report what it will
cost to Repaire and putt them in a condition to hold Prisoners of
State. Sir Christopher Wren is also to surveigh the ground behind
the Chapell in the Tower where it is proposed to Erect some buildings
for keeping prisoners, and to report in like manner what it will
cost and how many prisoners it can be made to hold, and he is
further to consider of the annexed Draught proposed for the Erecting
the Said Buildings, and give his opinion upon it, or else make such
other Draught as he shall think fitt, and Lay the same together with
his report upon the whole matter before the Committee as soon as
conveniently may be.

/*
<sc>Wm. Bridgeman.</sc>
*/
#/

/#
To Ye Rt Honble ye Committee of Councill for the Affaires of Ireland.
May it please yr L^{rs}.

In obedience to yr L^{rs} Order of the 15th instant, that I should view the
severall places in the Tower therein mentioned--viz. Beauchamp
Tower and ye Bloody Tower and report wt Expense will put them
in condition to hold prisoners of State and what number they will
hold I have accordingly viewed the same and report that both the
said places were put the last summer in better repair than they have
been in many years being whited, mended, and made strong, but to
make them fitt for prisoners of State, if by that Expression it be
intended that they should be wainscotted and made fitt for hangings
and furniture it may cost £200 or much more but with such walls,
windows and winding stairs they never can be made proper with any
cost without rebuilding. I have also in pursuance of y^r L^{rs} Order
viewed the place behinde the Chappell and considered and do
approve the annex'd draught proposed to be built wch I take to
be as Large as ye place will afford containing 15 square and if it be
well built in 3 storeys, Cellars and garretts it will cost £600. As to
the number of Prisoners the place may hold I can only report wt
number of rooms each place contains. Beauchamp Tower hath
a large Kitching 2 large rooms and 2 small servants rooms. Bloody
Tower hath a kitching one room and one closset. The new building
may contain 9 single rooms, besides cellars and garrets and a
kitching all wch is humbly submitted.

/*
<sc>Chr Wren</sc>
Apprill 17 1695.
*/
#/
-----File: 161.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Tower of London, Commanded in Chief [**F1 in-line illus.] by the R^t. Hon^{ble} Robert L^d. Lucas[**. ?]</i>]
-----File: 162.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 163.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XVII

QUEEN ANNE


Few prisoners of any degree were committed to the Tower
during the reign of Anne, except during the first year of
her rule, when the Continental wars brought some French
prisoners of war, who were confined there. In 1712, however,
the famous Sir Robert Walpole was committed to the
Tower "for high breach of trust and notorious corruption."
Walpole's committal was entirely due to political intrigue,
and his disgrace and imprisonment closely resembled that
of the Duke of Choiseul in the reign of Louis XVI., when
half of the French society of the day flocked to the fallen
Minister's house at Chanteloup. Walpole's apartment in
the Tower was crowded all day long with a succession
of smart folk, among whom the Duke and Duchess of
Marlborough, with whom the Queen had broken off her
former great intimacy, were conspicuous; Godolphin,
Somers, Sunderland, and Pulteney, Earl of Bath, were
also frequent visitors.

Three years after Walpole had left his rooms in the
Tower they were occupied by George Granville, Earl of
Lansdowne--a nobleman of strong Jacobite proclivities.
He was a poet as well as a Jacobite, and finding
Walpole's name written on the window of the room, he
wrote beneath it the following distich:--

/*
"Good unexpected, evil unforeseen,
Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene;
Some, raised aloft, come tumbling down amain,
And fall so hard, they bound and rise again."
*/
-----File: 164.png---------------------------------------------------------

It may be interesting at this place to recall some of
the incidents connected with the Mint in the Tower.

Few persons on reading the name of John Rotier, which
is placed on the commemoration brass tablet in the Chapel of
St Peter's in the Tower bearing the names of the illustrious
dead there buried, would probably have an idea of his
claims to distinction. So little artistic interest is connected
with the old fortress that Rotier's name deserves more than
a passing mention.

John Rotier, or Roettier, belonged to a family of
medallists, and was the son of an Antwerp jeweller who
had been of considerable assistance to Charles II. during
his exile. Rotier came over to England soon after Charles
returned, and, on the recommendation of the King, was
received into the Mint under Simon the chief medallist.
In the year 1662, Rotier, with his two brothers, became
the King's medallist, with quarters in the Tower. Pepys
often came to see the three brothers at work, and was
much interested in 1667, when Rotier was engaged in
making a new medal for Charles, in which the figure of
Britannia was being taken from the beautiful face and
form of Miss Stuart, one of Charles's mistresses, and
afterwards Duchess of Richmond; this is the same figure,
with a little alteration, that appears on our copper pence
at the present day. Rotier had also made a Great Seal
for Charles, and on the accession of James he made that
monarch's coronation medal.

The King's profile appears on the obverse of this medal,
and on the reverse is a trophy of armour, with ships in
the background, and the words "Genus Antu Antiquum"
engraved above. It appears to be an excellent likeness,
the determined lines of obstinacy and self-will which
marked James's face being admirably rendered. When
William came to the throne of his father-in-law Rotier
fell into disgrace, being supposed to be a Jacobite, a not
unnatural supposition, seeing his connection with both
James and Charles. But what was more alarming than
-----File: 165.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>THE SOUTH-EAST PROSPECT OF THE CHAPEL ROYAL OF S^T. PETER IN THE TOWER.</i>]
-----File: 166.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 167.png---------------------------------------------------------
any supposition of Jacobite sympathies was a rumour that
the exiled King had returned, and was lying concealed
in Rotier's lodgings: he was promptly accused of stealing
some dies from the Mint, and of striking coins for the
service of James.

A Committee of the House of Commons sat on the
poor medallist, its decision being that "It is too great
a trust and may be of dangerous consequence for the
said Roettier to have the custody of the dies, he being
a Roman Catholic and keeping an Irish Papist in his
house, and having the custody of the said dies, it lies in
his power to let them out when he pleases, or to coin
false money in the Tower. That the Lord Lucas has
complained that the Tower is not safe while so many
Papists are entertained in Roettier's house." All Roetier's
dies and puncheons were accordingly seized, and he himself
was driven from the Tower. He appears to have
returned, however, in 1703, just after a visit he had
received from Sir Godfrey Kneller, who had been sent
to him by Queen Anne to execute a medal of her
Majesty, which, however, the old medallist was unable
to perform; he died shortly afterwards, and was buried
in St Peter's Chapel.

In an interesting article by Mr W. J. Hocking in the
<i>Gentleman's Magazine</i> for March 1895, entitled "Money-*making
in the Tower," there is some curious information
respecting the Mint once established in the Tower. Mr
Hocking says that coining operations have been carried
on in the Tower in every reign since the Conquest, save
in those of Richard I. and Edward V. It is even possible
that the Romans struck their money in the Tower, for
Constantine had a mint working in London, the treasurer
of which bore the title of Praepositus Thesaurorum
Augustinium. In Edward the Third's reign it was
enacted that all moneys, wherever coined, should be
made in the same manner as in the Tower. James I.
was present at the trial of the Pix in the Tower,
-----File: 168.png---------------------------------------------------------
and "diligently viewed the state of his money and
mint."

Money was coined in fifteen places at least, besides the
Tower, in the reign of Charles I. It was during his tenure
of the crown that Nicholas Briot, a French engraver, worked
at the Tower, the money then turned out being said to be
the finest in the world.

After the Restoration small steel rolling-mills were set up
in the Tower driven by horse and water power, the cost of
striking one year's coinage being £1400. The new milled
coinage was a great improvement on the old hammered
coins. It was at this time that the great English medallist
Simon's "Petition Medal" was produced. This came from
a competition, between him and Roetier; the latter won
the competition, and consequently made the puncheons
and dies for the new coinage. Simon was infuriated by
his defeat and spoke some hasty words which, being
repeated to Charles, caused his dismissal. Some twenty
of Simon's "petition medals" were struck, with the legend
round their edges as follows:--"Thomas Simon most
humbly prays your Majesty to compare this his tryall
piece with the Dutch (Roetier's), and if more truly drawn
and embossed, more gracefully order'd and more accurately
engraven, to relieve him." For one of these medals as
much as £500 has been given by a firm of London coin-*dealers,
so rare is the piece.

The punishment meted out to coiners and clippers of
coins in this reign was incredibly barbarous. In those
so-called "good old times" in one day seven men were
hanged and a woman burned for clipping and counterfeiting
the current coin.

A Coinage Act was passed by Parliament in 1696, and
under its provisions all the old hammered money was called
in, melted in furnaces near Whitehall, and sent in ingots
to the Tower, to reappear in the new milled form. That
wonderful man, Sir Isaac Newton, was made Master of
the Tower Mint, and the number of mills being increased
-----File: 169.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Beauchamp Tower</i>]
-----File: 170.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 171.png---------------------------------------------------------
by his advice, in a few months, owing to his energy, a
time of great commercial prosperity ensued. In 1810
the new Office of the Mint was opened on Little Tower
Hill, where it still remains.

The following is taken from Mr Hocking's article on
the Tower Mint:--

"On the morning of December 20th, 1798, James
Turnbull, one Dalton, and two other men were engaged
in the press-room swinging the fly of the screw-press,
while Mr Finch, one of the manager's apprentices, fed
the press with gold blank pieces, which were struck into
guineas. At nine o'clock Mr Finch sent the men to
their breakfast. They all four went out; but Dalton and
Turnbull returned almost directly. And while the
latter held the door, Turnbull drew a pistol and advanced
upon Mr Finch, demanding the key of the closet where
the newly-coined guineas were kept. Finch, paralyzed
with fear and surprise, yielded it up. An old gentleman
who was in the room expostulated; but both were forced
into a sort of passage or large cupboard and locked in.
Turnbull then helped himself to the guineas, and managed
to get off with no less than 2308. For nine days he
effectually concealed himself in the neighbourhood, and
then, while endeavouring to escape to France, was
apprehended. He was tried, convicted, and sentenced to
death. In his defence he cleared Dalton from any willing
complicity in the crime." Turnbull was executed at the
Old Bailey.
-----File: 172.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XVIII

GEORGE I.


With George the First the Whigs came into power, and
soon after the new King's accession, Robert Harley, Earl
of Oxford, and the former Lord Treasurer, was sent to the
Tower on the charge of having advised the French King
as to the best means for capturing the town of Tournai.
Harley had resigned his Treasurer's staff three days before
Queen Anne's death, and on the 10th of June 1715, he
was impeached by the Commons, of whom only a short
time before he had been the idol, and committed to the
Tower. His courage never wavered, although he was left
to languish for two years in the fortress, and at length, on
petitioning to be tried, he was acquitted in July 1717. He
died seven years later, aged sixty-two. Lord Powis and
Sir William Wyndham soon followed Lord Oxford to the
Tower, but the latter was very shortly after set at liberty
without even undergoing a trial. Wyndham was member
for the county of Somerset from 1708 until his death in
1740; he had been Secretary of State for War and
Chancellor of the Exchequer to Queen Anne, as well as
Master of the Buckhounds. His talents and his eloquence
made him one of the foremost men of that brilliant age,
and Pope sang his praises:

/*
"How can I Pult'ney, Chesterfield forget,
While Roman spirit charms, and Attic wit;
Or Wyndham, just to freedom and the throne,
The Master of his passions and our own?"
*/

Another distinguished prisoner at this time in the Tower
-----File: 173.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>View of the Tower in the time of George I</i>]
-----File: 174.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 175.png---------------------------------------------------------
was George Granville, Lord Lansdowne of Bideford.
Descended from that race of heroes, the Grenvilles of the
West, of whom Admiral Sir Richard of the <i>Revenge</i>
was the most famous, and grandson of Sir Bevil Grenville,
killed at the Battle of Lansdowne, George Granville
belonged by race and conviction to the party of the Stuarts,
and, too proud to seek safety in flight, as did so many of
his contemporaries at the accession of the House of
Hanover, he remained in England, and even protested
from his place in the House of Lords against the Bill for
attainting Ormonde and Bolingbroke. Strongly suspected
of favouring the cause of James Stuart, Lansdowne was
accused of having taken part in a plot for raising an insurrection
in the West Country, where his name was a pillar
of strength, "being possessed," as Lord Bolingbroke said,
"now with the same political phrenzy for the Pretender as
he had in his youth for his father." The plot was discovered,
and at the close of September 1715, Lansdowne
and his wife were committed to the Tower and kept there
in close confinement until all danger of insurrection had
passed away, and until the rising in the North had been
crushed. In Queen Anne's time, Lansdowne had been
sung as

/*
"Trevanion and Granville as sound as a bell
For the Queen and the Church and Sacheverell."
*/

In 1710 he had succeeded Walpole as Minister for War,
but he prided himself more upon his literary gifts than
upon those of his birth and rank, or upon his political
eminence. He wrote poetry, sad stuff, and plays which
were worse than his poems, for in these he out-Wycherlyed
Wycherley. The plays of the days of the Restoration
not excepted, there is nothing more indecent in theatrical
literature than Granville's "The Old Gallant."

The famous rising in Scotland in 1715 in favour of the
son of James II., the Chevalier de St George, or, as his
adherents called him, James the Third, brought many of
-----File: 176.png---------------------------------------------------------
the leaders of that ill-starred rebellion to the Tower, and
some to the block. Of the latter the young Earl of
Derwentwater was the most conspicuous. James Radcliffe,
Lord Derwentwater, was the only Englishman of high birth
who took up arms for the Jacobite cause in this rebellion
of 1715. He appears to have been a youth of high merit,
and was only twenty-six when he was persuaded to throw
life and fortune on the side of the Chevalier. One who
knew him writes "that he was a man formed by nature
to be generally beloved." His connection with the Stuarts
was possibly brought about by the fact that his mother,
Mary Tudor, was a natural daughter of Charles II., and
also that he was a Catholic by birth. He was a very
wealthy landowner, with vast estates, which, after his
execution, were given to Greenwich Hospital. They
brought him in, including the mines, between thirty and
forty thousand pounds a year, a great fortune in those days.
His home, from which he derived his title, was situated in
the most beautiful of the English lakes, the lovely Lake
of Derwentwater in Cumberland, and was called Lord's
Island.

Derwentwater had been taken prisoner at Preston, with
six Scotch noblemen, William Maxwell, Earl of Nithsdale,
Robert Dalziel, Earl of Carnwath, George Seton, Lord
Wintoun, William Gordon, Lord Kenmure, William
Murray, Earl of Nairn, and William Widdrington, Lord
Widdrington. They were brought up to London with
their arms tied behind them, their horses led by soldiers,
and preceded by drums and music, in a kind of trumpery
triumph, and imprisoned in the Tower. Much interest
was made on their behalf in both Houses of Parliament;
in the Commons, Richard Steele pleaded for them, and
in the Lords, a motion for reading the petition presented
to both Houses, praying the King to show mercy to the
prisoners, had only been carried against the Ministry by
a majority of nine. An address was presented to George
the First, praying him to "reprieve such of the condemned
-----File: 177.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Window in the Cradle Tower</i>]
-----File: 178.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 179.png---------------------------------------------------------
lords as deserved mercy." To this petition George, or
rather, his Prime Minister, Robert Walpole, answered that
the King would act as he thought most consistent for the
dignity of the Crown and the safety of the people, thus
virtually rejecting the address. Many of those who had
places in the Government and had voted against the
Ministry were dismissed from their offices.

The trial of the Jacobite lords commenced on the
9th of February, and lasted ten days. Wintoun, the only
one of the prisoners who pleaded "not guilty," was the
only one pardoned; the others were condemned to death,
Lord Cowper, the Lord High Steward, pronouncing
sentence on the 29th of February as follows:--"And now,
my Lords, nothing remains but that I pronounce upon you,
and sorry I am that it falls to my lot to do it, that terrible
sentence of the law, which must be the same that is usually
given against the meanest offenders in the like kind. The
most ignominious and painful parts of it are usually remitted
by the grace of the Crown, to persons of your quality; but
the law in this case being deaf to all distinction of persons,
requires that I should pronounce, and accordingly it is adjudged
by this Court, 'That you, James, Earl of Derwentwater,
William, Lord Widdrington, William, Earl of
Nithsdale, Robert, Earl of Carnwath, William, Viscount
Kenmure, and William, Lord Nairne, and every of you,
return to the prison of the Tower, from whence you came,
and thence you must be drawn to the place of execution;
when you come there, you must be hang'd by the neck,
but not till you be dead; for you must be cut down alive;
then your bowels must be taken out, and burnt before your
face; then your heads must be severed from your bodies,
and your bodies divided each into four quarters; and these
must be at the King's disposal. And God Almighty be
merciful to your souls!'"

Widdrington and Carnwath were released by the Act
of Grace in 1717, and Lord Nairne was subsequently
pardoned, the four remaining noblemen being left to die.
-----File: 180.png---------------------------------------------------------

At ten o'clock in the morning of the 24th of February,
Derwentwater and Kenmure were brought out of the
Tower in a coach and were driven to a house known as
the Transport Office, on Tower Hill, facing the scaffold,
which was draped in black cloth; there they remained
whilst the final preparations for their execution were being
carried out.

The first to be led out was young Lord Derwentwater;
as he mounted the scaffold steps his face was seen to be
blanched, but beyond this he showed no other sign of
emotion in that supreme moment, and when he spoke to
the people it was with a firm voice and a composed manner.
After praying for some time he rose from his knees and
read a paper in which he declared himself a faithful subject
of the Chevalier St George, whom he said he regarded
as his rightful King. There was some roughness upon the
surface of the block, which Derwentwater perceiving, he
bade the executioner plane it smooth with the axe. He
then took off his coat and waistcoat, telling the headsman
to look afterwards in the pockets, where he should find
some money for himself to pay him for his trouble, adding
that the signal for the blow would be when for the third
time he repeated the words, "Lord Jesus, receive my
soul," by stretching out his arms. He was killed at one
stroke. Thus perished in his twenty-eighth year a man
who was loved by all who knew him, rich and poor, and
whose memory still lingers in his beautiful northern lake
country in many an old song and ballad.

There is a curious legend connected with Derwentwater's
death to the effect that after his execution, the
peasantry rose and drove Lady Derwentwater from Lord's
Island, believing that it was at her instigation that her
husband had joined the Jacobite rising; a ravine near
their old home, through which Lady Derwentwater is
supposed to have fled, still goes by the name of the
"Lady's Rake." On the night of his execution a brilliant
"aurora borealis" lighted the northern skies of Derwent-*
-----File: 181.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Earl of Derwentwater.</i>[**, ?]

(<i>From a Contemporary Engraving.</i>)]
-----File: 182.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 183.png---------------------------------------------------------
*water, which the people in that district interpreted as being
a signal of Heaven's displeasure at the death of the
popular young Earl; and the aurora is still called in the
North, "Lord Derwentwater's Lights."

After the scaffold had been cleaned, and every mark
of the first execution removed, Lord Kenmure was brought
out from the house in which he had waited whilst
Derwentwater was being put to death, and came on the
scaffold accompanied by his son, two clergymen, and some
other friends. Kenmure, unlike Derwentwater, belonged
to the Church of England. He made no formal speech,
but expressed his sorrow at having pleaded guilty. He
told the executioner that he should give him no signal,
but that he was to strike the second time he placed his
head upon the block. It required two blows of the axe
to kill him.

Kenmure had married the sister of Robert, Earl of
Carnwath, who was one of his fellow-prisoners, but who was
respited and pardoned. By judicious management, Lady
Kenmure was able to save a remnant out of the forfeited
estates of her husband, and, later on, George the First
returned part of the family estates to her and her children.

Some of the crowd who had gone to Tower Hill that
morning in the hope of seeing three of the Jacobite lords
beheaded, must have been surprised when only two
appeared; the third doomed man, Lord Nithsdale, had
made his escape from the Tower a few hours before his
fellow-captives were led out to die.

Lord Nithsdale's escape on the eve of his execution
reads more like a romance than sober history. But it was
his wife who made the name famous for all time by her
devotion and undaunted courage. All hope seemed lost
after the Address for Mercy had been rejected by the
King, and all idea of respite had indeed been abandoned
except by the brave Lady Nithsdale, who was the
daughter of William, Marquis of Powis, and was born
about the year 1690. On hearing of the capture of her
-----File: 184.png---------------------------------------------------------
husband at Preston, Lady Nithsdale had ridden up to
London from their home, Torreglas, in Dumfriesshire,
through the bitter winter weather, and, although not a
strong woman, had endured all the hardships of the long
journey and the anguish of anxiety regarding her husband,
with heroic courage.

Before leaving Torreglas she had buried all the most
important family records in the garden. Accompanied
by her faithful Welsh maid, Evans, and a groom, she rode
to Newcastle, and thence by public stage to York, where
the snow lay so thick that no mail-coach could leave the
city for the south. Nothing daunted, Lady Nithsdale
rode all the way to London. On her arrival in the capital,
her first object was to intercede for her husband with the
King. She went to St James's Palace, where George
was holding a drawing-room, and sat waiting for him in
the long corridor on the first floor, through which the
King would pass after leaving his room before entering
the state rooms. Lady Nithsdale had never seen George
the First, and in order to make no mistake, she had
brought a friend, a Mrs Morgan, who knew the King
by sight. When George appeared, "I threw myself,"
Lady Nithsdale writes, "at his feet, and told him in
French that I was the unfortunate Countess of Nithsdale,
that he might not pretend to be ignorant of my person.
But seeing that he wanted to go off without taking my
petition, I caught hold of the skirt of his coat, that he
might stop and hear me. He endeavoured to escape out
of my hands, but I kept such strong hold, that he dragged
me on my knees, from the middle of the room to the very
door of the drawing-room. At last one of the Blue
Ribands who attended his Majesty took me round the
waist, while another wrested the coat from my hands.
The petition, which I had endeavoured to thrust into his
pocket, fell to the ground in the scuffle, and I almost
fainted away from grief and disappointment."

There was no time to be lost, and after this last chance
-----File: 185.png---------------------------------------------------------
of obtaining a hearing from King George had failed, Lady
Nithsdale knew that she, and she alone, could save her
husband's life. To this almost hopeless task she now
devoted all her mind and all her courage.

Returning to the Tower, where she had already been
on several occasions, she pretended to be the bearer of
good news. On this occasion she only remained long
enough to tell Lord Nithsdale the plan she had formed
for effecting his deliverance, after which she returned to
her lodgings in Drury Lane. There she confided her
plan to her landlady, a worthy soul, named Mills, and
prevailed upon her to accompany her to the Tower, together
with Mrs Morgan, after some arrangement had
been made in their costumes, to which "their surprise and
astonishment made them consent," writes Lady Nithsdale,
"without thinking of the consequences." On their way
to the fortress Lady Nithsdale entered into the details
of her plan. Mrs Morgan was to wear a dress belonging
to Mrs Mills over her own clothes, and in this
dress Lady Nithsdale would disguise her husband, and
so transformed, he could make his way out of the Tower.
It was a bold scheme, and was admirably carried out in
every detail.

On arriving at the Governor's, now the King's, House,
where Lord Nithsdale was imprisoned, Lady Nithsdale
was only allowed to bring one friend in at a time, and first
introduced Mrs Morgan, a friend, she said, of her husband,
who had come to bid him farewell. Mrs Morgan, when
she had come into the prisoner's room, took off the outer
dress she was wearing over her own, and into this Lord
Nithsdale was duly introduced. Then Lady Nithsdale
asked Mrs Morgan to go out and bring in her maid Evans.
"I despatched her safe," she writes, "and went partly
downstairs to meet Mrs Mills, who held her handkerchief
to her face, as was natural for a person going to take
a last leave of a friend before his execution; and I desired
her to do this that my lord might go out in the same
-----File: 186.png---------------------------------------------------------
manner. Her eyebrows were inclined to be sandy, and
as my lord's were dark and thick, I had prepared some
paint to disguise him. I had also got an artificial headdress
of the same coloured hair as hers, and rouged his
face and cheeks, to conceal his beard which he had not
had time to shave. All this provision I had before left
in the Tower. The poor guards, whom my slight liberality
the day before had endeared me to, let me go out
quietly with my company, and were not so strictly on the
watch as they usually had been, and the more so, as they
were persuaded, from what I had told them the day before,
that the prisoners would obtain their pardon. I made Mrs
Mills take off her own hood, and put on that which I had
brought for her. I then took her by the hand, and led
her out of my lord's chamber; and in passing through
the next room, in which were several people, with all the
concern imaginable, I said, 'My dear Mrs Catherine, go
in all haste, and send me my waiting-maid; she certainly
cannot reflect how late it is. I am to present my petition
to-night, and if I let slip this opportunity, I am undone,
for to-morrow it is too late. Hasten her as much as
possible, for I shall be on thorns till she comes.' Everybody
in the room, who were chiefly the guards' wives and
daughters, seemed to compassionate me exceedingly, and
the sentinel officiously opened me the door. When I had
seen her safe out, I returned to my lord, and finished
dressing him. I had taken care that Mrs Mills did not
go out crying, as she came in, that my lord might better
pass for the lady who came in crying and afflicted; and
the more so that as he had the same dress that she wore.
When I had almost finished dressing my lord, I perceived
it was growing dark, and was afraid that the light of
the candle might betray us, so I resolved to set off. I
went out leading him by the hand, whilst he held his
handkerchief to his eyes. I spoke to him in the most
piteous and afflicted tone, bewailing the negligence of
my maid Evans, who had ruined me by her delay. Then I
-----File: 187.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Tower from Tower Hill</i>]
-----File: 188.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 189.png---------------------------------------------------------
said, 'My dear Mrs Betty, for the love of God, run quickly
and bring her with you; you know my lodging, and if
ever you made despatch in your life, do it at present;
I am almost distracted with this disappointment.' The
guards opened the door, and I went downstairs with
him, still conjuring him to make all possible dispatch. As
soon as he had cleared the door, I made him walk before
me, for fear the sentinel should take notice of his walk,
but I continued to press him to make all the despatch he
possibly could. At the bottom of the stairs I met my
dear Evans, into whose hands I confided him. I had
before engaged Mr Mills to be in readiness before the
Tower, to conduct him to some place of safety in case we
succeeded. He looked upon the affair as so very improbable
to succeed, that his astonishment, when he saw us,
threw him into such a consternation, that he was almost
out of himself, which, Evans perceiving, with the greatest
presence of mind, without telling Lord Nithsdale anything,
lest he should mistrust them, conducted him to some of
her own friends on whom she could rely, and so secured
him, without which we certainly should have been undone.
When she had conducted him, and left him with them,
she returned to Mr Mills, who by this time recovered
himself from his astonishment. They went home together,
and having found a place of security, brought Lord
Nithsdale to it. In the meantime, as I had pretended
to have sent the young lady on a message, I was obliged
to return upstairs and go back to my lord's room in the
same feigned anxiety of being too late, so that everybody
seemed sincerely to sympathise in my distress. When
I was in the room I talked as if he had been really present.
I answered my own questions in my lord's voice, as nearly
as I could imitate it, and walked up and down as if we
were conversing together, till I thought they had time
enough thoroughly to clear themselves of the guards. I
then thought proper to make off also. I opened the door
and stood half in it, that those in the outward chamber
-----File: 190.png---------------------------------------------------------
might hear what I said, but held it so close that they
could not look in. I bade my lord formal farewell for the
night, and added, that something more than usual must
have happened to make Evans negligent, on this important
occasion, who had always been so punctual in the smallest
trifles; that I saw no other remedy than to go in person;
that if the Tower was then open, when I had finished
my business, I would return that night; but that he might
be assured I would be with him as early in the morning
as I could gain admittance into the Tower, and I flattered
myself I should bring more favourable news. Then,
before I shut the door, I pulled through the string of the
latch, so that it could only be opened on the inside. I
then shut it with some degree of force, that I might be
sure of its being well shut. I said to the servant, as I
passed by (who was ignorant of the whole transaction),
that he need not carry in candles to his master, till my lord
sent for them, as he desired to finish some prayers first."
What an admirable wife was Lady Nithsdale, and what a
devoted maid to her was her "dear Evans."

Lord Nithsdale got safely out of London in the suite
of the Venetian Ambassador,--whose coach and six were
sent some days after his escape to Dover,--disguised in
the livery of one of the Ambassador's footmen. From
Dover he succeeded in getting to Calais, and later on to
Rome.

Although Lady Nithsdale had succeeded in rescuing
her lord from the scaffold, her self-devotion did not end
there, her task, she thought, was still incomplete. In
spite of the personal peril she herself ran if found in
England or over the border, for the King was mightily
annoyed at the ruse by which she had snatched her husband
from the jaws of death, Lady Nithsdale determined to
protect her son's estates, which, owing to the attainder of
his father, were now Government property. Her first step
was to recover the papers she had hidden in the garden
at Torreglas. "As I had hazarded my life for the father,"
-----File: 191.png---------------------------------------------------------
she writes, "I would not do less than hazard it for the
son." Attended by the faithful Evans and her groom, who
had accompanied her upon the memorable ride from York
to London, Lady Nithsdale returned to Dumfriesshire.
Having arrived safely at Torreglas, she put a brave face
upon her errand, and invited her neighbours to come and
see her as if she had been sent by the Government itself.
On the night before these invitations were due, this most
astute and courageous lady dug up the family papers in
the garden, sending them off at once to a place of safety
in the charge of a trusty retainer. Before day broke she
had again started on her return journey to the south, and
while the Dumfries justices were laying their wise heads
together, and consulting whether they should or should
not give orders for the seizure of Lady Nithsdale, she had
put many miles between herself and them. When the
good folk of Dumfries arrived at Torreglas, they found
that the lady they sought in the name of the law had given
them the slip.

It is pleasant to picture the impotent rage of George
Rex when he heard of this second defiance of his kingly
authority; he declared that Lady Nithsdale did whatever
she pleased in spite of him, and that she had given him
more trouble than any other woman in the whole of
Europe.

Lady Nithsdale joined her husband in Rome, where
they lived many years together, he dying in 1749, and
his devoted wife following him to the grave soon afterwards.
She rests in the beautiful Fitzalan Chapel, near
Arundel Castle. One hopes that the faithful Welsh maid,
Evans, was with them till the end. According to Lord
de Ros, Lady Nithsdale's portrait, painted by Godfrey
Kneller, still hangs in her Scottish home. "Her hair,"
he says, "is bright brown, slightly powdered; with large
soft eyes, regular features, and a fair complexion. Her
soft expression and delicate appearance give little indication
of the strength of mind and courage she displayed.
-----File: 192.png---------------------------------------------------------
Her dress is blue silk, with a border of cambric, and over
it a cloak of brown silk."

Another of the Jacobite lords, Wintoun, also escaped
from the Tower. Little is known regarding the manner
in which he broke his prison and thus cheated the heads-*man,
but it is supposed that he managed to saw through
the bars of his window, having previously bribed his gaoler
to let him be free and undisturbed in his work of filing the
iron. In his case there were no romantic details, or, if
there were any, they have not come down to us. Of Lord
Wintoun's escape, Lord de Ros writes: "Being well
seconded by friends of the cause in London, he was conveyed
safely to the Continent."

Another large batch of prisoners who were suspected
of being Jacobites came into the Tower in the year 1722,
the most notable of them being Francis Atterbury, Bishop
of Rochester, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, Lords North,
Orrery, and Grey, Thomas Layer Corkran, Christopher
Layer, and an Irish clergyman named Kelly. Of these,
the last was the only one executed on the charge of high
treason.

The plot in which these persons of varying degrees
were accused of being implicated, was to seize the Tower,
and raise a rebellion in favour of the Chevalier, an idea
which goes to show that the old fortress was even as late
as the days of our first Hanoverian sovereign regarded
as an essential to the assumption of the supreme power
in the country. Atterbury was attainted and banished,
after undergoing a strict imprisonment, which he endured
with much patience from the 24th of August 1722, until
the 18th of January in the following year.

/*
"How pleasing Atterbury's softer hour;
How shines his soul unconquered in the Tower,"
*/

as Pope has sung it. Atterbury never returned to England,
dying after eight years of exile in France.

In 1724 the Earl of Suffolk was committed to the
-----File: 193.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Middle Gate</i>]
-----File: 194.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 195.png---------------------------------------------------------
Tower "for granting protection in breach of the standing
orders of the House of Lords," whatever that crime may
have been, and in the following year Lord Chancellor
Macclesfield was imprisoned there "for venality and
corruption in the discharge of his office."
-----File: 196.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XIX

GEORGE II.


Before coming to the year 1746, when the old fortress
was the scene of the imprisonment and death of the
Jacobite leaders of the rebellion of 1745, it will be necessary
to enter at some length into the treatment of some obscure
Scotch prisoners who, shortly before the great outbreak in
Scotland, were put to death in the Tower. The story of
the deaths of these unfortunate men has never appeared
in any account of the Tower and its prisoners, and I am
therefore all the more anxious to give as full an account
as I have been able to find of that event. It was owing
to the kindness of Mr Gardiner, who placed in my hands
a pamphlet with illustrations of the time, describing the
fate of the brothers Macpherson and Shaw, that I became
aware of this tragic story.[A]

This triple execution, which, as I have said, took place
shortly before the Jacobite rising in Scotland in the
"'45," may have had something to do with the strong
feeling against the English Government which prevailed
in the North; it was certainly one of those acts by which
governments make themselves and their ministers odious.
And the execution on Tower Green in 1744 may well
have caused the unpopularity, not to say hatred, amongst
the Scotch of the English Government.

The only reference I have been able to find to this

[Footnote A: The pamphlet has been copied <i>in extenso</i>, and will be found in the Appendix. The
illustrations, with the exception of one which I was allowed to reproduce by the kindness
of Mr Birch, the Curator of the Soane Museum, were also lent me by Mr Gardiner.]
-----File: 197.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Published according to Act of Parliament 1753</i>

<i>A North West View of the Tower of London.</i>  |   <i>Vue du coté du Nord-ouest de la Tour de Londres.</i>]
-----File: 198.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 199.png---------------------------------------------------------
event are two short passages in Hume and Smollett's
"History of England" (vol. xi. page 164), and the other
in a letter from Horace Walpole to Sir Horace Mann
("Walpole's Letters," vol. i., Letter <sc>LXXIV.</sc>).

"King George was in Germany," writes Hume, "the
Duke of Cumberland, at the head of the British army, was
employed in Flanders, and great part of the Highlanders
were keen for insurrection; their natural feelings were, on
this occasion, stimulated by the suggestion of revenge.
At the beginning of the war, a regiment of those people
had been formed and transported with the rest of the
British troops to Flanders. Before they were embarked,
a number of them deserted with their arms, on pretence
that they had been decoyed into the service by promises
and assurances that they should never be sent abroad;
and this was really the case. They were overtaken by a
body of horse, persuaded to submit, brought back to
London, pinioned like malefactors, and tried for desertion;
three were shot to death <i>in terrorem</i>, and the rest were
sent to the plantations. Those who suffered were persons
of some consequence in their own country, and their fate
was deeply resented by the clans to which they belonged.
It was considered a national outrage, and the Highlanders,
who are naturally vindictive, waited impatiently for an
opportunity of vengeance."

So far, the historian upon the subject. This is the
letter-writer's account of the matter. "We are," writes
Walpole to Mann on the 19th May 1743, "in more confusion
than we care to own. There lately came up a
highland regiment from Scotland to be sent abroad. One
heard of nothing but their good discipline and quiet disposition.
When the day came for their going to the
water-side, one hundred and nine of them mutinied, and
marched away in a body. They did not care to go to
where it would be equivocal for what King they fought.
Three companies of dragoons are sent after them. If you
happen to hear of any rising, don't be surprised--I shall
-----File: 200.png---------------------------------------------------------
not, I assure you. Sir Robert Monroe, their Lieutenant-Colonel,
before their leaving Scotland, asked some of the
Ministry: 'But suppose there should be any rebellion in
Scotland, what shall we do for these eight hundred men?'
it was answered, 'Why, there would be eight hundred
fewer rebels there.'"

It seems to have been a scandalous act on the part
of the Government to have drafted these Scottish soldiers
to Flanders immediately upon their arrival in London,
after they had promised that they should not be taken
on foreign service. And the cruelly harsh treatment
meted out to the deserters, and the execution of the three
men, must have stirred up a strong feeling of hatred in
Scotland against George the Second's Government--a
hatred which burst into open flame in the "'45."

The next event in the history of the Tower is the
imprisonment and execution of the Scotch Jacobite lords
after the rebellion of 1745. For more than a score of
years the old fortress had been free of political prisoners,
and Tower Hill had seen no more executions. The blood
of the "Rebel Lords," as they were called, was the last
that dyed the scaffold in England. These "Rebel Lords"
were the Marquis of Tullibardine, the Earl of Cromarty,
and Lords Kilmarnock and Balmerino. Tullibardine had
already taken up arms for the cause of James in 1715,
and when he was taken prisoner after the "'45," was a
broken-down, elderly man whose life was drawing to a
close, and who was so feeble that, when the standard of
Prince Charles was unfurled at Glenfinnan, he had to be
supported by men upon either side whilst he held the
flagstaff. His father, the Duke of Athol, had obtained
leave from George I. to will his title and estates to his
second surviving son, James, who succeeded to the
dukedom in 1729. Tullibardine had meanwhile fled to
France, but in 1719 made a desperate attempt to raise
the clans at Kinsale. He was defeated by General Wightmore
at Glenshiel, and a proclamation was issued for his
-----File: 201.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Scotch Prisoners entering the Tower 1712[** 1742?]</i>]
-----File: 202.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 203.png---------------------------------------------------------
apprehension, together with the Earl Marischal and the
Earl of Seaforth. A reward of two thousand pounds was
promised for the capture of any of these noblemen.
During the next twenty-six years Tullibardine's life was
passed in France. On the 25th of July 1745, he landed
with Prince Charles at Borodale, and, as it has been said,
it was he who unfurled the Prince's standard on the 19th
of August at Glenfinnan.

After the defeat of the Pretender's forces at Culloden,
Tullibardine fled to Mull, but he was too broken in health
even to attempt escape from the English troops sent out
for his capture, and finally surrendered himself to Buchanan
of Drumskill. Taken first to Dumbarton Castle, and then
to Edinburgh, he was sent from the latter place to London
by sea. On his arrival at the Tower, Tullibardine was
in an almost dying state, and Lord Cornwallis, the
Governor, was allowed by the following order, to send a
Dr Wilmott to attend "the person formerly called Marquis
of Tullibardine, a prisoner in your custody, from time to
time as he shall desire during his indisposition, provided
the same to be in the presence of you or the Lieutenant."
On the 9th of July this staunch Cavalier died in the Tower,
thus escaping a public execution; he was only fifty-eight
years old. He was buried in St Peter's Chapel. William,
Earl of Kilmarnock, who was head of the family of Errol,
had fought at Culloden, and was taken prisoner with Lord
Balmerino. These, together with the Earl of Cromarty, who
had been captured at the castle of Dunrobin, in Sutherland,
were brought to London by sea, the warrant which committed
them to the Tower being dated the 28th of July.

The following letter from Mrs Osborn, the famous
Dorothy Osborn's great-niece by marriage, and a daughter
of the first Lord Torrington, and wife of John Osborn,
of Chicksands, in Bedfordshire, to her son, Sir Danvers
Osborn, dated 9th December 1745, gives an interesting
picture of the state of public feeling. She writes of the
"most shameful panick" which had seized London on the
-----File: 204.png---------------------------------------------------------
news of the advance of the Scottish army. People were
hurrying from their country houses for shelter in the
capital, and bringing their plate with them wherever they
could. This "panick" lasted for four days, and then
came the news of the retreat from Derby northwards, and
people went home again. She says: "The Prisoners
come to the Tower a fryday, 'tis not yet clear if the
Pretender's brother is there. They have strong suspicion
still, but the Ministry don't choose to talk about it." In
the following June, Mrs Osborn writes from Kensington:
"'Tis thought 'twill be August before the Lords can be
try'd. After some forms are past, the Peers must have
20 days notice. Lady Cromarty is in town, has been
at the Tower to enquire after her lord. She was at
Williamson's, and cryd most bitterly, but no one is suffered
so much as to look up at the windows. They were all
brought into Williamson's, and from there one by one
conducted to their apartments. No one knows where the
other is, and they are kept very strict, since the King of
France has ordered a most insolent Letter, and takes
himself to be King of England to forbid us punishing the
Rebels. Is the Prelates got off or not?" asks Mrs
Osborn, adding rather cold-bloodedly: "I wish they could
have been beheaded at Edinburgh, and not make such a
long piece of work as the forms will do here."

The trial of these "Rebel Lords" took place at Westminster
Hall with much ceremonial. The Lord High
Steward, Philip Yorke, Earl of Hardwicke, arrived from
Ormond Street, attended by a train of gentlemen-at-arms,
Black Rod and Garter King at Arms supporting him.
He was received by the guard in Old Palace Yard, "by
drums beating as to the Royal family." The peers were
in their robes, and the grand old Hall was filled to its
utmost limits with a vast crowd of spectators. Horace
Walpole, writing to Mann, says: "I am this moment
come from the conclusion of the greatest and most melancholy
scene I ever saw; you will easily guess it was the
-----File: 205.png---------------------------------------------------------
trial of the rebel Lords. As it was the most interesting
sight, it was the most solemn and fine. A coronation is
a puppet show, and all the splendours of it idle; but this
sight at once feasted one's eyes, and engaged all one's
passions. It began last Monday; the three parts of
Westminster Hall were enclosed with galleries, and hung
with scarlet; and the whole ceremony was conducted with
the most awful solemnity and decency, except in the one
point of leaving the prisoners at the bar amidst the idle
curiosity of the crowd, and even with the witnesses who
had sworn against them, while the Lords adjourned to
their own house to consult. No part of the Royal Family
was there, which was a proper regard for the unhappy
men, who were become their victims. One hundred and
thirty-nine Lords were present, and made a noble sight
on their benches, frequent and full. The Chancellor was
Lord High Steward, but though a most comely personage
with a fine voice, his behaviour was mean, curiously
searching for occasion to bow to the Minister (Henry
Pelham) that is no Peer, and consequently applying to
the other Ministers in a manner for their orders: and not
even ready at the ceremonial. To the prisoners he was
peevish; and instead of keeping to the humane dignity
of the law of England, whose character it is to point out
favour to the criminal, he crossed them, and almost scolded
at any offer they made towards defence. Lord Kilmarnock
is past forty, but looks younger. He is tall and slender,
with an extremely fine person; his behaviour a most just
mixture between dignity and submission; if in anything
to be reprehended, a little affected, and his hair too
exactly dressed for a man in his situation. But when I
say this, it is not to find fault, but to show how little fault
there is to be found. For Lord Balmerino, he is the most
natural, brave old fellow I ever saw; the lightest intrepidity,
even to indifference. At the bar he behaved
like a soldier and a man; in the intervals of form with
carelessness and humour. He pressed extremely to have
-----File: 206.png---------------------------------------------------------
his wife, his pretty Peggy, with him in the Tower. When
they were brought from the Tower in separate coaches,
there was some dispute in which the axe must go, old
Balmerino cried, 'Come, come, put it with me!' At the
bar he played with his fingers upon the axe, while he
talked with the gentleman gaoler; and one day, somebody
coming up to listen, he took the blade and held it like
a fan between their faces. During the trial a little boy
was near him, but not tall enough to see, he made room
for the child, and placed him near himself. When the
trial began, the two Earls (Kilmarnock and Cromarty)
pleaded guilty, Balmerino not guilty, saying he would
prove his not being at the taking of the Castle of Carlisle,
as was said in the indictment. Then the King's Counsel
opened, and Serjeant Skinner pronounced the most absurd
speech imaginable. Then some witnesses were examined,
whom afterwards the old hero shook cordially by the hand.
The Lords withdrew to their house, and returning, demanded
of the judges whether, one point not being proved,
though all the rest were, the indictment was false? to which
they unanimously answered in the negative. Then the
Lord Steward asked the Peers severally whether Lord
Balmerino was guilty. All said, 'Guilty upon honour,'
and then adjourned, the prisoner having begged pardon
for giving them so much trouble. On Wednesday the
prisoners were again brought to Westminster Hall, at
about eleven o'clock, to receive sentence; and being asked
what they had to say, Lord Kilmarnock, with a fine voice,
read a very fine speech, confessing the extent of his crime,
but offering his principles as some alleviation."

The executions were fixed to take place on the 18th
of August, the news being broken to Lord Kilmarnock
by his friend, Mr J. Foster, a clergyman. When old
Balmerino was told by the Lieutenant of the Tower,
General Williamson, of the fatal day, he was at dinner
with his wife (Margaret, daughter of Captain Chalmers).
"Lady Balmerino," writes Williamson, "being very much
-----File: 207.png---------------------------------------------------------
surprised, he desired her not to be concerned at it, his lady
seemed very disconsolate, and rose immediately from table,
on which he started from his chair, and said 'Pray, my
Lady, sit down, for it shall not spoil your dinner.' 'The
brave old fellow,' as Walpole calls Lord Balmerino, and
with justice, turned upon the General, 'Lieutenant,' he said,
'with your damned warrant you have spoiled my Lady's
dinner.'"

The following account of the execution of the Jacobite
leaders is taken from the <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i> for the
month of August 1745, and appears to have been the most
accurate and the most detailed:--

/#
At six o'clock a troop of lifeguards, and 1000 of the footguards--being
fifteen men out of each company, marched from the parade in
St James's park thro' the city to Tower-hill, to attend the execution of
the Earl of Kilmarnock and the Lord Balmerino, and being arrived there
were posted in lines from the Tower to the scaffold, and all around it.
About 8 o'clock the Sheriffs of London, and their under sheriffs and their
officers, <i>viz.</i> six sergeants at mace, six yeomen, and the executioner, met
at the Mitre Tavern in Fenchurch Street, where they breakfasted, and went
from thence to the house, lately the Transport Office, on Tower-hill near
Catherine's Court, hired by them for the reception of the said lords, before
they should be conducted to the scaffold which was erected about thirty
yards from the said house.

At ten o'clock the block was fixed on the stage and covered with black
cloth, and several sacks of sawdust up to strew on it; soon after their
coffins were brought, covered with black cloth, ornamented with gilt nails,
etc. On the Earl of Kilmarnock's was a plate with this inscription,
"Guliemus Come de Kilmarnock decollatur 18 Augusti 1746. Etat suae
42," with an Earl's coronet over it, and six coronets over the six handles;
and on Lord Balmerino's, was a plate with this inscription, "Arthurus
Dominus de Balmerino decollatur 18 Augusti 1746. Etat suae 58," with
a baron's coronet over it, and six others over the six handles. At a quarter
after ten the Sheriffs went in procession to the outward gate of the Tower,
and after knocking at it some time, a warder within asked, "Who's there?"
The officer without replied, "The sheriffs of London and Middlesex."
The warder then asked, "What do they want?" The officer answered,
"The bodies of William, Earl of Kilmarnock, and Arthur, Lord Balmerino,"
upon which the warder within said, "I will go and inform the Lieutenant
of the Tower," and in about ten minutes the Lieutenant of the Tower with
the Earl of Kilmarnock, and Major White with Lord Balmerino, guarded
by several of the warders, came to the gate; the prisoners were then
#/
-----File: 208.png---------------------------------------------------------
/#
delivered to the Sheriffs who gave proper receipt for their bodies to the
Lieutenant, who as usual said, "God bless King George!" to which the
Earl of Balmerino assented by a bow, and the Lord Balmerino said, "God
bless King J----s." Lord Kilmarnock had met Lord Balmerino at the
foot of the first stairs, he embraced him, who said to him, "My lord, I am
heartily sorry to have your company in this expedition." Soon after the
procession, moving in a slow and solemn manner, appeared in the following
order:--

/*
1. The Constable of the Tower.
2. The Knight Marshal's men and Tipsters.
3. The Sheriffs' Officers.
4. The Sheriffs, the prisoners, and their chaplains. Mr Sheriff Blachford walking with the Earl of Kilmarnock, and Mr Sheriff Cockayne with the Lord Balmerino.
5. The Tower Warders.
6. A guard of musqueteers.
7. The two hearses and a mourning coach.
*/

When the procession had passed through the lines within the area of
the circle formed by the guards, the passage was closed, and the troops of
horse who were in the rear of the foot in the lines wheeled off, and drew
five feet deep behind the foot, on the south side of the hill facing the
scaffold. The lords were conducted into separate apartments in the
house, facing the steps of the scaffold; their friends being admitted to
them. The Earl of Kilmarnock was attended by the Rev. Mr Foster,
a dissenting minister, and the Rev. Mr Hume, a near relative of the
Earl of Hume; and the chaplain of the Tower, and another clergyman
of the Church of England, accompanied Lord Balmerino; who on entering
the door of the house, hearing several of the spectators ask eagerly
"Which is Lord Balmerino?" answered smiling, "I am Lord Balmerino,
gentlemen, at your service." The parlour and passage of the house, the
rails enclosing the way thence to the scaffold, and the rails about it, were
all hung with black at the sheriff's expense. The Lord Kilmarnock in the
apartment allotted to him, spent about an hour at his devotions with Mr
Foster, who assisted him with prayer and exhortation. After which Lord
Balmerino pursuant to his request, being admitted to confer with the Earl,
first thank'd him for the favour, and then ask'd, if his lordship knew of
any order signed by the Prince (meaning the Pretender's son) to give no
quarter at the battle of Culloden! And the Earl answering No, the Lord
Balmerino added, nor I neither, and therefore it seems to be an invention
to justify their own murders! The Earl replied he did not think this a
fair inference, because he was informed, after he was prisoner at Inverness,
by several officers, that such an order, signed by George Murray, was in
the Duke's custody; "George Murray!" said Lord Balmerino, "then they
should not charge it on the Prince!" Then he took his leave, embracing
Lord Kilmarnock, with the same kind of noble and generous compliments,
as he had used before, "My dear Lord Kilmarnock, I am only sorry that
#/
-----File: 209.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

[**P2: script on left unclear]

/*
[** F1 reads as]<i>J. M. del. et [** F1 word unclear]</i>

<i>The Governor of y^e Tower
delivering the Prisoners to
the Sheriffs of London at
the [**F1 Barr?] for Execution</i>
*/

[**P2: script over "EXECUTION" unclear]

/*
[** F1] <i>Published according to Act of Parliament</i>
*/

<i><sc>A Perspective View</sc> of TOWER HILL and the Place of <sc>Execution</sc></i>

<i>of the <sc>Lords Kilmarnock</sc> and <sc>Balmerino</sc> on Monday 12 of August 1746</i>

/*
<i>The View of the scaffold with [**P2: remaining script is unclear/ F1 RH side - now deciphered!]
the Guards Surrounding
at the time of Execution</i>
*/
]
-----File: 210.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 211.png---------------------------------------------------------
/#
I cannot pay the reckoning alone; once more, farewell for ever!" His
persone was tall and graceful, his countenance mild, and his complexion
pale; and more so as he had been indisposed. He then returned to his
own room. The Earl then, with the company kneeling down, join'd in a
prayer delivered by Mr Foster; after which having sat a few moments,
and taken a second refreshment of a glass of wine, he expressed a desire
that Lord Balmerino might go first to the scaffold; but being informed
this could not be, as his lordship was named first on the warrant: he
appeared satisfied, saluted his friends, saying he would make no speech
on the scaffold, but desired the minister to assist him in his last moments,
and then accordingly with other friends, proceeded with him to the scaffold.
The multitude who had long been expecting to see him on such an awful
occasion, on his first appearing upon the scaffold, dressed in black with
a countenance and demeanour, testifying great contrition, showed the
deepest signs of commiseration and pity; and his lordship at the same
time, being struck with such a variety of dreadful objects at once, the
multitude, the block, his coffin, the executioner, the instrument of death,
turned about to Mr Hume, and said, "Hume, this is terrible," tho' without
changing his voice or countenance. After putting up a short prayer,
concluding with a petition for his Majesty King George, and the royal
family, in vindication of his declaration: in his speech, his lordship
embraced and took a last leave of his friends. The executioner, who
before had something administered to keep him from fainting, was so
affected by his lordship's distress, and the awfulness of the scene that, on
asking his forgiveness, he burst into tears. My Lord bade him take
courage, giving him at the same time a purse with five guineas, and telling
him that he would drop his handkerchief as a signal for the stroke. He
proceeded, with the help of his gentlemen, to make ready for the block,
by taking off his coat, and the bag from his hair, which was then tucked
up under a napkin cap, but this being made up so wide as not to keep
up his long hair, the making it less caused a little delay; his neck being
laid bare, tucking down the collar of his shirt and waistcoat, he kneeled
down on a black cushion at the block, and drew his cap over his eyes, in
doing which, as well as in putting up his hair, his hands were observed to
shake; but either to support himself, or as a more convenient posture for
devotion, he happened to lay both his hands upon the block, which the
executioner observing, prayed his lordship to let them fall, lest they should
be mangled, or break the blow. He was then told that the neck of his
waistcoat was in the way, upon which he rose, and with the help of a
friend took it off, and the neck being made bare to the shoulders, he
kneeled down as before. In the meantime, when all things were ready for
the execution, and the black bays which hung over the rails of the scaffold
having, by direction of the Colonel of the Guard, or the Sheriffs, been
turned up that the people might see all the circumstances of the execution;
in about two minutes (the time he before fixed) after he kneeled down, his
lordship dropping his handkerchief, the executioner at once severed the
#/
-----File: 212.png---------------------------------------------------------
/#
head from the body, except only a small part of the skin, which was
immediately divided by a gentle stroke; the head was received in a piece
of red baize, and, with the body, immediately put into the coffin. The
scaffold was then cleansed from the blood, fresh sawdust strewed, and,
that no appearance of a former execution might remain, the executioner
changed such of his clothes as appeared bloody.
#/

In the meantime Lord Balmerino was waiting for his
own end with that imperturbable courage which never
seemed to desert him. He talked cheerfully with his
friends, and drinking a glass of wine, blithely asked them
to drink to his "ain degrae ta haiven." When the under-*sheriff
came to summon him to the scaffold the old lord
interrupted him by asking how the executioner had done
his work upon Lord Kilmarnock, and remarking that it
was well done, turned to his friends and said, "Gentlemen,
I shall detain you no longer," immediately proceeding to
the scaffold, "which he mounted with so easy an air as
astounded the spectators." He wore the uniform in which
he had fought at the battle of Culloden, a blue coat turned
up with red, with brass buttons, and a tie wig. Having
walked several times round the scaffold, he bowed to the
people, and going up to the coffin lying ready to receive
his body, he read the inscription, saying, "It is right";
then he carefully examined the block which he called his
"pillow of rest." He required his spectacles to read the
speech he had prepared, and "read it with an audible voice,
which, so far from being filled with passionate invective,
mentioned his Majesty as a prince of the greatest magnanimity
and mercy, at the same time that, thro' erroneous
political principles, it denied him a right to the allegiance
of his people." This speech was duly handed over to the
Sheriff, and when the executioner came forward to beg
Lord Balmerino's pardon, as was the custom, the staunch
old nobleman said, "Friend, you need not ask me forgiveness,
the execution of your duty is commendable!" Then
he gave him three guineas, adding, "Friend, I never was
rich, this is all the money I have now, and I am sorry I
-----File: 213.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>A True[**P1: unclear] Representation of <sc>TOWER-HILL</sc>, as it Appear'd from a rais'd point of View on the
North side,[**P1: unclear] Aug^t. y^e {th}. 1746, when the Earl of Kilmarnock and the Lord Balmerino were Beheaded.</i>]
-----File: 214.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 215.png---------------------------------------------------------
cannot add anything to it but my coat and waistcoat."
These he himself placed upon his coffin, together with his
neckcloth, and putting on a plaid cap, declared that he died
a Scotchman. He next bade farewell to his friends, and
then looking down upon the crowd said to a gentleman
who stood near him, "Perhaps some may think my
behaviour too bold, but remember, sir, that I now declare
it is the effect of confidence in God, and a good conscience,
and I should dissemble, if I should shew any signs of fear."
As he passed the executioner he took the axe from his
hand and felt the edge, and, returning it to the man, clapped
him on the shoulder to encourage him. Turning down the
collar of his shirt he showed the man where to strike,
bidding him "do it resolutely, for in that would consist his
kindness." After giving the Tower warders some money,
he asked which was his hearse, and ordered the driver to
bring it nearer. "Immediately," says the writer in the
<i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>, "without trembling, or changing
countenance, he again knelt at the block, and having with
his arms stretched out, said, 'O Lord, reward my friends;
forgive my enemies--and receive my soul,' he gave the
signal by letting them fall, but his uncommon firmness and
intrepidity, and the unexpected suddenness of the signal,
so surprised the executioner, that though he struck the
part directed, the blow was not given with strength enough
to wound him very deep; on which it seemed as if he
made an effort to turn his head towards the executioner,
and the under jaw fell and returned very quick, like anger
and gnashing the teeth; but it could not be otherwise, the
part being convulsed. A second blow immediately succeeding,
the first rendered him, however, quite insensible,
and a third finished the work. His head was received in
a piece of red baize, and with his body put into the coffin,
which, at his particular request, was placed on that of the
late Marquis of Tullibardine in St Peter's Chapel Church
in the Tower, all three Lords lying in one grave."

At the close of that year the brother of the ill-fated
-----File: 216.png---------------------------------------------------------
Earl of Derwentwater, Charles Radclyffe, was also executed
on the same spot. He came very gallantly to the scaffold
dressed "in scarlet trimm'd with gold, a gold laced waistcoat,
and white feathers in his hat." He was actually Earl
of Derwentwater, his coffin in St Giles's in the Fields
bearing the inscription, "Carolus Radclyffe, Comes de
Derwentwater, decollatur, 8 Dec. 1746, Ætis 53. Requiescat
in Pace." But although the Derwentwater estates
had only been confiscated to the Crown for his life a clause
in a later Act of Parliament directed that "the issue of any
person attainted of High Treason, born and bred in any
foreign dominion, and a Roman Catholic, shall forfeit his
reversion of such estate, and the remainder shall for ever
be fixed in the Crown, his son is absolutely deprived of
any title or interest in the fortune of that ancient family to
the amount of better than £200,000." Charles Radclyffe,
was the younger brother of James, Earl of Derwentwater,
and with him had been taken prisoner at Preston, and condemned
to death after trial and conviction. But he had
been respited, and it was thought would ultimately have
been pardoned, had he not escaped from his prison in
Newgate. He went to France, and following the
Pretender to Rome, was given a small pension by that
prince, and this was literally all that he had to live upon.
Later, he returned to Paris, and there he married the
widow of Lord Newburgh, by whom he had a son. He
came to England in 1733, but went back again to France
and accepted a commission from Louis XIV., "to act as
officer in the late rebellion." But before he could reach
Scotland on board the <i>Esperance</i>, he, his men, and
several other Scotch and Irish officers were captured by
an English vessel, and Charles Radclyffe ended his unfortunate
career as intrepidly as he had lived it, on Tower
Hill.

By this time the axe had almost done its work in
England, and Tower Hill was to see only one more head
laid upon the block--that of Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat,
-----File: 217.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The</i> <b>Effigie</b> <i>of the late <b>CHARLES RATCLIFFE Esq^r.</b>
who was beheaded on little Tower Hill, Monday Decem^r 8^{th}.
1746.[** , ?] for being concern'd in the Rebellion in the Year 1745.</i>]
-----File: 218.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 219.png---------------------------------------------------------
who was the last of the Jacobite lords to be executed.
Lord Lovat's long life had begun in 1667, and it had been
as wild and vicious as it had been lengthy. Like the
Regent Orléans, he might very justly have been called a
"fanfaron de vice." In his youth he had lived in Paris,
where he had become a Roman Catholic, if such a man as
Lovat could be said to have any religion. He enjoyed
what was probably a unique experience in that he was
imprisoned both in the Bastille and in the Tower, for
although there is no authority for saying that he was the
only man who underwent imprisonment in the great State
prisons of England and of France, on the other hand, there
is also no authority for saying that he was not. He had
been in the Bastille in 1702, on the charge of having
betrayed a Jacobite plot to the English Government.
Although not actually in arms during the "'45" rebellion,
Lovat had kept up a correspondence with the Young
Pretender; and this correspondence cost him his life.
When captured at the Isle of Moran, after the Battle of
Culloden, he was so infirm that he had to be carried to
Edinburgh in a litter, and thence in the same way to
Berwick, and so to London.

It was at the White Hart at St Albans that Hogarth
met him, and there it was that great artist painted the
admirable little full-length portrait of the old Jacobite,
which is now in the National Portrait Gallery. Hogarth
used to say that he painted Lovat as he sat counting up
the numbers of the rebel forces on his fingers. The
engraving of this portrait, taken by the artist himself, had
an immense success at the time, the printing press being
kept employed day and night, and for a considerable time
Hogarth made twelve pounds a day by its sale.

Lovat arrived at the Tower on the 15th of August
1746, and according to the account given in the <i>Gentleman's
Magazine</i> for that month, came "in an open Landau
driven by six horses, guarded by a party of Liguier's
Horse, and accompany'd in the Landau by an officer--as
-----File: 220.png---------------------------------------------------------
he passed through the streets he seemed very unconcerned,
but coming on the hill, he turn'd his eyes towards the
scaffold erecting for beholding the execution of the lords,
and lifting up his hands, said, 'A few days, and it will be
my awful fate!'"

The whole aspect of Tower Hill, with the exception
of the appearance of the old fortress and its outer walls,
has been entirely changed since Lovat saw it with the
huge scaffoldings being erected for the spectators of his
companions' executions--and for his own a few months
later. The house into which they were led to await their
death no longer exists. It occupied the north-east corner
of Catherine's Court, and was formerly the Transport Office.
From a raised platform, which was flush with the scaffold,
the Jacobite lords walked from the house, which stood
immediately opposite to the spot where so many remarkable
men have perished by the axe of the headsman.
During the last few years the actual site of the scaffold has
been marked by a tablet in the garden that now surrounds
the place of execution, where the axe had done its work
from the time of Edward Plantagenet, Earl of Warwick,
the son of the Duke of Clarence, to that of Simon Fraser,
Lord Lovat. With the latter ended the long list of State
executions on Tower Hill, which, during five centuries,
had stained its soil with some of the noblest blood in the
country.

On the 18th of December, Lovat was taken from the
Tower to the House of Lords, where the articles of his
impeachment were read to him. The best account of the
trial is undoubtedly that contained in one of the many
letters written by Horace Walpole to Sir Horace Mann.
Writing on the 20th of March 1747, Walpole says: "I
have been living at old Lovat's trial, and was willing to
have it over before I talked to you about it. It lasted
seven days; the evidence was as strong as possible; and
after all he had denounced he made no defence. The
Solicitor-General (Sir William Murray), who was one of
-----File: 221.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Execution of the Rebel Lords 1726[**F1: 1746?]</i>]
-----File: 222.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 223.png---------------------------------------------------------
the managers of the House of Commons, shone extremely.
The Attorney-General (Sir Dudley Ryder),
who is a much greater lawyer, is cold and tedious. The
old creature's behaviour has been foolish, and at last
indecent.

"When he came to the Tower, he told them that if
he were not so old and infirm, they would find it difficult
to keep him there. They told him they had kept much
younger. 'Yes,' said he, 'but they were inexperienced;
they had not broke so many gaols as I have.' At his own
home he used to say, that for thirty years of his life he
never saw a gallows but it made his neck ache. His last
act was to shift his treason upon his eldest son, whom he
forced into the rebellion. He told Williamson, the
Lieutenant of the Tower, 'We will hang my eldest son,
and then my second shall marry your niece.' He has a
sort of ready humour at repartee, not very well adapted
to his situation. One day that Williamson complained
that he could not sleep, he was so haunted with rats, he
replied: 'What do you say, that you are so haunted with
Ratcliffes?' The first day, as he was brought to his trial,
a woman looked into the coach, and said: 'You ugly old
dog, don't you think you will have that frightful head
cut off?' He replied: 'You ugly old ----, I believe I
shall!' At his trial he affected great weakness and infirmities,
but often broke out into passions; particularly
at the first witness, who was his vassal. He asked him
how he dared to come thither; the man replied, to satisfy
his conscience. The two last days he behaved ridiculously,
joking, and making everybody laugh, even at the sentence.
He said to Lord Ilchester, who sat near the bar: 'Je
meurs pour ma patrie, et ne m'en soucie guère.' When
he withdrew, he said: 'Adieu, my Lords, we shall never
meet again in the same place!' He says he will be
hanged, for his neck is so short and bearded that he should
be struck in the shambles. I did not think it possible
to feel so little as I did at so melancholy a spectacle, but
-----File: 224.png---------------------------------------------------------
tyranny and villany[**villainy], wound up by buffoonery, took off all
edge of concern."

Thursday, April 9th, was the day fixed for Lovat's
execution, and shortly before he arrived on Tower Hill
one of the scaffoldings built for the spectators of his execution,
and which held nearly a thousand people, suddenly
collapsed, eight or ten persons being killed outright, whilst
many others had broken legs and arms. Whatever may
be thought of the action of the Hanoverian Court in beheading
the rebellious Jacobite lords, there is no doubt
that a richly-deserved punishment was meted out to Lovat.
Forty years before, at the last session of the Scottish
Parliament, previous to the union of the two countries,
Lord Belhaven had declared in a memorable speech, that
Captain Fraser, as Lord Lovat then was, 'deserved, if
practicable, to have been hanged five several times, in five
different places, and upon five different accounts at least,
as having been a traitor to the Court of St James's, a
traitor to the Court of St Germains, a traitor to the Court
of Versailles, and a traitor to his own country of Scotland;
that he deserved to be hanged as a condemned criminal,
outlaw, and fugitive, for his treatment of the widow of the
late Lord Lovat's sister. Nay, so hardened was Captain
Fraser, that he erected a gallows, and threatened to hang
thereon the lady's brother, and some other gentlemen of
quality who accompanied him, in going to rescue her out
of that criminal's cruel hands."[**as shown in the page image, this quote opens with a ' and closes with a "] This was in 1706, and to
judge by all accounts of Lovat's career in the next forty
years, he deserved to be hanged yet five times more, "if
practicable."

Lovat waked about three o'clock on the morning of
his execution, and was heard to "pray with genuine
emotion." He was very cheerful, and having ordered
his wig to be sent to the barber, "that he might have time
to comb it out genteely, he sat down to a breakfast of
minced veal," ordering coffee and chocolate for his friends,
whose health he drank in wine and water. When the
-----File: 225.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The north west prospect of the Tower of <g>LONDON</g></i>

<i>at the time of Execution of the rebel Lords, in 1746-7
with a particular View of the falling of a Scaffold, whereby above fifty lost their lives and were disabled
at the Execution of Lord Lovat</i>.]
-----File: 226.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 227.png---------------------------------------------------------
Sheriff of London came to demand his body, he responded
to the call with alacrity, saying, "I am ready"; and on his
way downstairs accepted General Williamson's invitation
to rest in the Lieutenant's room, and asked him in French
if he could "take leave of his lady, and thank her for her
civilities. But the General told his lordship in the same
language that she was too much affected with his lordship's
misfortunes to bear the shock of seeing him, and therefore
hoped his lordship would excuse her." From the Lieutenant's
house, Lord Lovat was conveyed in the Governor's
coach to the Outer Gate, where he was delivered over to
the Sheriffs, who took him in another coach to the house
which had already served as the last resting-place of Lords
Balmerino and Kilmarnock on the way to the scaffold.
Here a room had been got ready for him, hung with black
cloth and with sconces. At first his friends were denied
admittance, but upon Lord Lovat applying to the Sheriffs,
leave was granted. During the time of waiting Lovat
thanked the Sheriffs for "their favours," and desired that
his clothes might be given up to his friends with his body,
also asking that his head might be received in a white
cloth, and put into the coffin. This was promised, as well
as that the holding up of the head at the corner of the
scaffold should be dispensed with. Lord Lovat was
assisted up the steps of the scaffold by two warders, and
looking round on the great multitude of people, exclaimed,
"God save us! why should there be such a bustle about
taking off an old grey head, that cannot go up three steps
without three bodies to support it." Then seeing that one
of his friends looked very unhappy, he slapped him on the
shoulder, saying: "Cheer up thy heart, man, I am not
afraid, why should you?" Like old Lord Balmerino, he
felt the edge of the axe, and examined his coffin, upon
which was inscribed: "Simon Fraser Dominus de Lovat,
Decollat April 9, 1747. Ætat Suae 80." After repeating
some lines from Horace and Ovid, according to the <i>Gentleman's
Magazine</i>, "he called his solicitor and agent in
-----File: 228.png---------------------------------------------------------
Scotland, Mr Wm. Fraser, and presented him with his
gold-headed cane, and said: 'I deliver you this cane
in token of my sense of your faithful services, and of my
committing to you all the power I leave upon earth,' and
then embraced him. He also called for Mr James Fraser,
and said, 'My dear James, I am going to Heaven, but
you must continue to crawl a little longer in this evil
world.' And taking leave of both, he deliver'd his hat,
wig, and clothes to Mr William Fraser, and desired him
to see that the executioner did not touch them; he ordered
his cap to be put on, and unloosing his neckcloth and the
collar of his shirt, he kneeled down at the block, and pulled
the cloth which was to receive his head close to him. But
being placed too near the block, the executioner desired
him to remove a little farther back, which, with the warders'
assistance, was immediately done; and his neck being
properly placed, he told the executioner he would say a
short prayer, and then give the signal by dropping his
handkerchief. In this position he remained about half
a minute, and then, throwing his handkerchief upon the
floor, the executioner at one blow severed his head from
his body, which was received in the cloth, and together with
his body put into the coffin, and carried in the hearse back
to the Tower, where it remained until four o'clock, and
was then taken away by an undertaker, in order to be sent
to Scotland, and deposited in his own tomb in the church
of Kirkhill; but leave not being given, as was expected,
it was again brought back to the Tower, and interred near
the bodies of the other lords. Lord Lovat, in a codicil to
his will, had ordered that all the pipers from John o' Groats
to Edinburgh were to play before his corpse, for which
they were to have a handsome allowance, and though he
did not expect this wish to be complied with, yet he said
that he hoped that the good old women of his country
would sing a 'coronach' before him." The legend that
Lovat's ghost, in a monk's dress, appeared during a
tempest with its head under its arm, probably had its
-----File: 229.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <sc>A Representation</sc> <i>of the Execution of Lord <sc>Lovat</sc></i>.

/*
A. <i>The scaffold.</i>
B. <i>Lord Lovat's head on y^e Block.</i>
C. <i>Cloth to receive the Head.</i>
D. <i>The Executioner with y^e Axe.</i>
E. <i>The Coffin.</i>
F. <i>The House from which he came on the Scaffold.</i>
*/

<i>Execution of Lord Lovat 1746</i>]
-----File: 230.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 231.png---------------------------------------------------------
origin in this desire of his to have a great Scottish wake
at his funeral, and also to his once having worn the dress
of a Jesuit priest in one of his adventures at St Omer; of
this there is a curious contemporary print.

Lord Cromarty was pardoned, owing to the exertions
of his wife, who petitioned every member of the Privy
Council, and had fallen in a swoon at the feet of George II.
at Kensington, in the very act of presenting him with a
petition for mercy. Her prayer was more graciously received
by that sovereign than Lady Nithsdale's petition
had been by his father. It is said that a son born to Lady
Cromarty about this time had the mark of an axe upon
its neck.

The block, now in the Armoury of the Tower, is undoubtedly
the one upon which Lovat was beheaded, and
is declared to have originally been made for his execution.
The axe which stands beside it was used to behead him,
as well as the other Jacobite lords who suffered death in
1746, but whether it was used previous to these executions
cannot be ascertained with any certainty.

Although Lord Lovat was the last person beheaded in
England, a peer was hanged at Tyburn after being imprisoned
in the Tower in the last year of the reign of
George II. This was Lawrence Shirley, Earl Ferrers,
who had murdered his steward, Johnson, in cold blood.
Probably if this crime had been committed in these days
Lord Ferrers would have benefited by a more merciful
dispensation. That he had been insane on several occasions
is certain, and he had been wilder and more reckless
in his manner of life than could be accounted for by
anything short of madness, his fits of wild rage clearly
pointing to a disordered brain. He had married a harmless
and amiable woman, the daughter of Sir V. Meredith,
and she, unable to live with such a brutal husband as
Ferrers proved himself to be, had obtained a judicial
separation. Ferrers was wildly extravagant, and it was
owing to his debts that the unfortunate lawyer, Johnson,
-----File: 232.png---------------------------------------------------------
who had been appointed by a special Act of Parliament
to manage the Shirley estates, was made the steward of
the property. Ferrers had repeatedly sworn that he would
rid himself of this agent and steward, and having enticed
him to his house, deliberately shot the poor man as he
knelt begging for his life. Ferrers was arrested, and
brought to the Tower under a guard of constables. A
stranger procession than that of Lord Ferrers to his
prison can scarcely be imagined. He was in his own
carriage, a landau drawn by six horses, and was dressed
in "a riding frock, wearing boots, and a jockey cap." In
this costume he appeared before the House of Lords in
February 1760. He was imprisoned in the Middle Tower,
two warders being in an adjoining room, whilst two sentries
kept guard at the foot of the Tower stairs. There he
remained for the two months which elapsed before his
trial. On the 5th of May he was hanged at Tyburn, with
all the pomp and circumstance that in those days clung
to the death of a criminal if he were a nobleman. Being
an Earl, Lord Ferrers was allowed to be strangled out of
existence by a silken instead of a hempen rope, and
although the sentence of his execution included the order
that his body was to be dissected, the order was dispensed
with.

Lord Ferrers was taken from the Tower in his own
carriage, drawn by six horses, to the gallows. He wore
a superb dress, a pale-coloured silk coat edged with silver
lace, and was accompanied by grenadiers, and horse and
foot guards, his carriage being followed by some of the
coaches of members of his family, and his hearse, which
was also drawn by six horses. The streets were so
crowded to see this unusual sight, that it took the procession
three hours to reach Tyburn from the Tower.
Lord Ferrers went out of the world in a far more becoming
manner than he had lived in it. He regretted, he said,
not to have been allowed to be executed on Tower Hill,
where his ancestor, the Earl of Essex, had been beheaded.
-----File: 233.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Waggons going into the Tower with treasure taken from the Spaniards (temp. George II.)</i>]
-----File: 234.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 235.png---------------------------------------------------------
If he actually made this remark, he could not have been
aware that his ancestor had not been beheaded on Tower
Hill, but within the Tower walls, on the Green. To judge
by his portrait, painted by the French portrait painter,
Andran, Lord Ferrers had a bullet-shaped head, and
must have closely resembled the ordinary type of jockey
when he appeared in his riding-boots and jockey cap
before his peers at his trial.

One of the greatest naval achievements of the last
century must not be omitted from the story of the Tower
during George the Second's reign. The great Spanish
treasure, worth a million and a half of dollars, captured
by Lord Anson, with his ship, the <i>Centurion</i>, on the 20th
of June 1743, was brought to the Tower the following
year. Two rare old engravings are here reproduced, in
which the treasure-laden waggons are being haled by the
joyous crowd up Tower Hill. Since the days of Elizabeth,
when the ships of Drake and Raleigh despoiled the fleets
and merchantmen of the Spaniards, no such spoil as this
had rewarded British prowess.
-----File: 236.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XX

GEORGE III.


The first political prisoner to enter the Tower in the
reign of George the Third was John Wilkes, the notorious
member for Middlesex. On the 30th of April 1763, Wilkes
was imprisoned in the Tower under a warrant signed by
Lords Egremont and Halifax, the charge against him
being, that he had written and published the <i>North Briton</i>
newspaper, the forty-fifth number of which was styled "a
most infamous and seditious libel." Wilkes, however, was
only kept for a week in the fortress, the Lord Chief-Justice
(afterwards Lord Camden) deciding that the offence
for which he was committed to prison, "was not an offence
sufficient to destroy the privilege of a member of Parliament,
that it was unconstitutional, illegal, and absolutely
void."

The next prisoners of note also made the acquaintance
of the inside of the fortress indirectly through the Press.
They were no less personages than the Lord Mayor of
London, Sir Brass Crosby, and one of his Aldermen,
Oliver, both members of Parliament. They had held a
messenger to bail, who, under the Speaker's warrant, had
apprehended the printers of the <i>London Evening Post</i>, and
had afterwards been charged by the arrested printer with
assault and false imprisonment. The Lord Mayor and
his Alderman attempted to justify themselves before the
House of Commons by claiming the City privileges,[A] but,

[Footnote A: See Appendix.]
-----File: 237.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>West Front of the Tower in the time of George III[** F1 .]</i>]
-----File: 238.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 239.png---------------------------------------------------------
nevertheless, they were kept in durance vile in the Tower
until the 23rd of July, when, Parliament being prorogued,
they obtained their liberty, after a confinement of four
months' duration. Their liberation was regarded as a
popular triumph, and celebrated with much rejoicing.

During the American War many of the Tower guns,
and a quantity of the ammunition stored there, was sent
across the Atlantic, and used against the so-called "rebellious
colonists."

In June 1780, that half-crazed fanatic, Lord George
Gordon, was a prisoner in the Tower, charged with the
instigation of the "No Popery" riots, which for a time
had placed London in peril of mob-rule, and caused great
loss of life and property by fire and pillage. After a trial
which lasted twenty-one hours, Lord George was declared
not guilty. A few years later, however, he was doomed
to end his life in Newgate prison. At the same time that
Lord George was a prisoner in the fortress, the Earl of
Pomfret was committed there for having challenged the
Duke of Grafton to fight a duel. In the following year
a French spy, named Henry Francis de la Motte, was in
the Tower on a charge of high treason. He was found
guilty, and hanged at Tyburn on the 23rd of July. In
1794 the coalition between Pitt and the Whigs took place,
and soon afterwards Pitt carried two Bills through Parliament,
one of which was to the effect that mere writing,
speaking, or preaching against the King's authority was
tantamount to treason; the other forbade all political
meetings, unless advertised beforehand, and permitted
their dispersal by any two justices of the peace. These
very coercive measures over-reached themselves, and juries
would not convict persons charged with offences under
their clauses. Horne Tooke, "Parson Tooke," as he was
familiarly called, the celebrated wit, was the most brilliant
of a set who desired more civil and religious liberty in
England, and with this object they formed themselves into
a society for the propaganda of their opinions, holding
-----File: 240.png---------------------------------------------------------
meetings, and making use of existing societies, clubs, and
associations. Tooke, Jeremiah Joyce, a clergyman, and
private secretary to Lord Stanhope, Thomas Hardy, a
shoemaker, John Thelwall, Bonney, Richter, and Lovatt,
were all arrested and placed in the Tower, and brought
before the Privy Council on a charge of high treason.
These so-called reformers were eight weeks in the fortress.
At length the trials took place, Hardy being
acquitted, to the great delight of the populace, the reformer
shoemaker becoming the hero of the hour. Tooke was
tried at the Old Bailey, and he also was acquitted, as were
the rest of the prisoners. In 1798, Arthur O'Connor, the
editor of the <i>Press</i>, an Irish Nationalist newspaper, with
John Alley, John Burns, and James O'Coighley were
placed in the fortress on a charge of maintaining a traitorous
correspondence with the French Directory. O'Connor
and his companions, it seems, had been entrusted by the
Society of the United Irishmen with a mission to the
French Directory in the month of March 1798, but on
their way to Paris they were arrested at Margate by Bow
Street runners, although they had bribed a fisherman with
£150 to take them across the Channel. On their luggage
being searched, uniforms, arms, and a large sum of money
were found. They were immediately brought back to
London, and lodged in separate prisons in the Tower, but
the trial was held at Margate, and James O'Coighley, who
seems to have been made the scapegoat, was hanged on
Pennenden Heath. Lord Thanet, who was a friend of
O'Connor's, was present at the latter's trial at Maidstone,
and with him were Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Sir Francis
Burdett, and Samuel Whitbread. During the trial
O'Connor made a bolt for freedom, springing out of the
dock, and forcing his way through the court; he almost
succeeded in escaping. A free fight ensued, and in the
<i>melée</i> Lord Thanet was arrested, and on the charge of
aiding and abetting the prisoner O'Connor to escape, and
with resisting the officers of the law, was sent off to the
-----File: 241.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Entrance to the Tower Menagerie in the time of George III.</i>]
-----File: 242.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 243.png---------------------------------------------------------
Tower. At his trial Lord Thanet remarked that, "he
thought it only fair that O'Connor should have a run for
it." Lord Thanet was tried at the Court of King's Bench
in May 1799, and with him a barrister named Ferguson,
who had also shown his sympathy with O'Connor during
his trial. Both were found guilty. Lord Thanet was
fined £1000, and sentenced to be imprisoned in the Tower
for twelve months; Ferguson had to pay a fine of £500,
and was ordered to be imprisoned in the King's Bench
prison. Sackville Tufton, Earl of Thanet, was the last
peer who was imprisoned in the Tower.

Ten years after this another prisoner was brought to
the Tower amidst wild scenes of popular excitement, such
as the old fortress had not witnessed since the mob led
by Wat Tyler had surged about its grey walls. This
prisoner was Sir Francis Burdett, who was sent to the
Tower on the 10th of April 1810, for an alleged libel on
the House of Commons in a letter addressed to his constituents,
the electors of Westminster, which had appeared
in Cobbet's "Political Register." In this letter Sir Francis
denied the power of the House of Commons to imprison
delinquents, and this statement was voted by the House to
be "libellous and scandalous." Burdett had made himself
obnoxious to the Ministers of his day by his strong Liberal
politics, and they at once made this letter an excuse for
venting their hatred upon him. The House of Commons
during an all-night sitting passed an order for his attachment,
and a warrant was drawn up and signed by Speaker
Abbot to arrest the too popular baronet, and place him in
the Tower. For some days Burdett refused to comply
with the Speaker's warrant, and the longer he refused to
be arrested the greater became the excitement throughout
London. Free fights took place between the military and
the mob, the windows of the Tory Ministers' houses were
smashed, and the electors of Westminster mustered round
Sir Francis's house in Piccadilly (that now occupied by his
noble-hearted and charitable daughter the Baroness Burdett-*
-----File: 244.png---------------------------------------------------------
*Coutts) in their thousands. These protested their devotion
to their beloved member, and their determination to prevent
his being taken to prison. At length Burdett was obliged
to surrender to the officers, who forced their way into his
drawing-room, and being placed in a coach, was driven by
way of the north of London, by Moorfields and the Minories,
to the Tower. On Tower Hill the mob seemed inclined
to attempt a rescue, but fortunately no conflict occurred,
and Sir Francis was safely conducted to his prison, in a
house near to that occupied by Colonel Mathew Smith,
who was acting in the place of the Lieutenant of the
Tower, General Vernon, the latter being too infirm to
attend to his duties. Lord Moira, the Constable of the
Tower, was present when Sir Francis arrived at the
fortress. As the soldiers who had escorted the Liberal
member for Westminster to the Tower were returning to
their quarters there was a collision between them and the
mob, and on Tower Hill the military were obliged to charge
the people, many being killed; two more people were killed
in Fenchurch Street, whilst riots broke out in several places
in the metropolis. Burdett's imprisonment lasted for ten
weeks, he being set at liberty when Parliament was prorogued
on the 21st of June. In order to avoid a fresh
demonstration he was taken down the river to his villa
at Wimbledon. In later years Sir Francis changed his
politics and became a steady Whig, but for thirty years
he was the most popular member of Parliament that ever
sat for Westminster.

Ten years again elapsed before the Tower opened its
gates to receive prisoners, these being Thistlewood, with
his crew of cut-throats, Ings, Harrison, Davidson, Wilson,
Tidd Kamment, and Brunt, who were imprisoned in the
fortress in 1820, for plotting to assassinate the members
of the Cabinet whilst they were dining at Lord Harrowby's
in Grosvenor Square. This was the plot known as the
Cato Street Conspiracy, from the meeting-place of this
band of desperadoes being in a house in that street,
-----File: 245.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The Tower from Tower Hill in the time of George III.</i>]
-----File: 246.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 247.png---------------------------------------------------------
where they were taken after a stubborn resistance.
Thistlewood was imprisoned in the Bloody Tower,
and was the last prisoner to occupy its gloomy
dungeon, for with him and his associates the Tower
ceased to be a prison of State, and it is to be hoped
will ever remain so. Ings and Davidson were placed in
St Thomas's Tower; the others in the Byward, Middle
and Salt Towers. Thistlewood and five others were hanged
in front of Newgate; the remainder were sentenced to
transportation for life.
-----File: 248.png---------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XXI

THE LATE REIGNS


During the late reigns there is little that calls for
record in the history of the Tower: happy is the
land that has no history. But for the fire in 1841,
which destroyed the ugly old Armoury of William III.'s
time, and the dastardly attempt made in 1885 to blow
up the White Tower, no events of much interest have
happened. The old fortress, however, has undergone
much structural alterations and needed restoration, in
which, although great mistakes have been made, as must
inevitably be the case when such a group of old buildings
as those in the Tower are touched, the result, on the
whole, has benefited the appearance of the fortress, and
above all, aided the preservation for future ages of the
noblest and most historical group of buildings that exists
in our land. May they endure: may they be venerated
by future generations of our race as they deserve to be.

The following narratives concern the two events just
named.


<sc>The Fire of 1841</sc>

On the night of Saturday, the 30th of October 1841,
the great Armoury, or storehouse, to the east of St Peter's
Chapel, was completely gutted. The fire broke out in the
Bowyer Tower, which abutted on the Armoury; an overheated
flue in a stove is supposed to have been the cause.
The Armoury had been commenced in the reign of James
-----File: 249.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Sketch of the Fire at the Tower in 1841.</i>]
-----File: 250.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 251.png---------------------------------------------------------
II. and completed in the reign of William and Mary, to
whom, when it was finished, a banquet had been given in
the great hall of the building. This hall, which occupied
the whole length of the first floor, was afterwards used as
a storehouse for small arms, 150,000 stands of which were
destroyed by the fire; besides these, were numbers of
cannon and trophies taken in the field. The loss caused
by the conflagration was estimated at £200,000. The
Regalia was saved from the Martin Tower by one of the
superintendents of the Metropolitan police, named Pierce,
an incident of bravery which Cruikshank perpetuated in
one of his finest etchings. Accompanied by the Keeper
of the Jewels and his wife, Pierce, with some other officials,
broke the bars of the cage behind which the Royal jewels
were kept, with crowbars, and then at great personal risk
he managed to squeeze himself through the narrow
opening thus made, handing out the crown, orb, and
sceptre to those outside. The silver font was too large
to pass through the opening, and it was necessary to break
away another bar of the grating. Repeated cries from the
outside now warned the party to leave the Jewel Room, as
the fire was rapidly gaining upon the tower, but Pierce
remained until he had secured the whole of the Regalia.
The heat inside was so intense that some of the cloth upon
which the Crown jewels rested was charred. "Some
public reward to Mr Pierce," writes Chamber, in his "Book
of Days," "who had so gallantly imperilled himself to save
the Regalia of the United Kingdom, would have been a
fitting tribute to his bravery. But no such recompense
was ever bestowed."

A contemporary account of the disaster in George Cruikshank's
<i>Omnibus</i>, edited by Laman Blanchard, gives the
following description of the destruction of the Armoury:--"There
stood the keeper himself, his wife at his side, partaking
the peril; and the warders whom he had summoned
to the rescue. We must, however, pourtray the stifling heat
and smoke; the clamour of the soldiers outside the closed
-----File: 252.png---------------------------------------------------------
portal, which the fires of the Armoury were striving to
reach; nor the roar of the still excluded flames, the clang
of the pumps, the hissing of the water-pipes, the gathering
feet and voices of the multitude. They are beyond the
pencil. The pressure from without increased. Again the
clamours rose high, and the furnace heat rose higher.
But the keeper abided his time--the crowbars were raised
in a dozen hands awaiting his word. It was given! The
first blow since the days of King Charles descended on the
iron fence; and Queen Victoria's crown safely deposited
in its case, and sheltered therein from smoke and flame,
and the common gaze, was removed to the Governor's
house. Orbs, diadems, and sceptres--dishes, flagons, and
chalices--the services of court and of church, of altar and
of banquet, were sent forth in the care of many a sturdy
warder, gallant John Lund being the leader. The huge
baptismal font, soon to be called into use for the Prince of
Wales, was last removed. The Jewel Room was as bare
as if Blood the First had left nought behind him for Blood
the Second. How must the spectators have gazed on the
bright procession, as from window, and roof, and turret,
the Armoury blazed out upon it!... Next in sublimity
to the spectacle of the blazing pile, was the scene afterwards
presented, when, as the fire lessened, and the smoke
cleared off, the whole space of the enormous armoury was
opened to the straining eye--a sight of awe and wonder.
Above was the sky of a November morn, and below,
covering the immense sweep of the floor, heaps of fused
metal, of dimensions scarce to be credited, with bayonet
points bristling up everywhere, close-set and countless,
like long blades of grass."

The buildings destroyed in the fire were the Armoury,
a hideous William III. building, the upper part of the
Bowyer or Chevener Tower, which was also hideous and
modern. The only relic of much interest destroyed in the
Armoury was the wheel of Nelson's ship <i>Victory</i>; the
arms destroyed were modern, and were all soon replaced.
-----File: 253.png---------------------------------------------------------
 [** parts of image difficult to read]
[**P2 I've looked it up on British Museum inventory and added the first two lines]

[Illustration: <i>Bragg & Ash 231 Strand</i>

<i>Printed by Kohler Denmark St^t</i>[**F1: formatting uncertain]

<i>The Conflagration as seen from Tower Hill before the destruction of the Roof of the Armoury.</i>

DESTRUCTIOn[**F1:DESTRUCTION] of the ARMOURY in the TOWER of LONDON.

<i>by fire on Saturday night October 30.^{th}  1841.</i>

Published by W. Spooner 377, Strand.]
-----File: 254.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 255.png---------------------------------------------------------

The present Gothic barracks were built upon the site
of the Armoury, and were opened in some state in 1845 by
the great Duke of Wellington, who was then Constable of
the Tower. These barracks, which were completed in
1849, were named after the Duke; they are loopholed
for musketry, and will hold 1000 men. North-east of the
White Tower is a modern castellated building which is
used by the officers of the garrison; further to the south-east
are the Ordnance Office and Storehouses. The area
of the Tower within the walls is twelve acres and a few
poles, and the circuit outside the moat is one thousand
and fifty yards.


<sc>The Fenian Attempt to blow up the White Tower
on the 24th of January 1885</sc>

Three explosions took place in London on Saturday,
the 24th of January 1885, during what the Irish Fenians
called the "Dynamite War." Two of these occurred in
the Houses of Parliament, the third in the White
Tower.

The mine, or rather, infernal machine, was laid in the
Armoury, and was placed between the stands of arms in
the Banqueting Room, both that chamber and the Council
Room being injured by the explosion.

Saturday being one of the days upon which the Tower
is free to visitors, the old building was full of people, the
Banqueting Room being well filled with women and children
when the explosion took place, at two o'clock--the
same time as that at which the explosion at the House of
Parliament occurred. The cries of the people in the room
were most distressing, and immediately the charge exploded,
the Banqueting Room was ablaze, the flames
communicating themselves to the floor above. Since the
fire in the Tower in 1841, a fire brigade had been stationed
in the building, and numerous fire extinguishers, such as
-----File: 256.png---------------------------------------------------------
small manuals and hydrants, were kept in readiness, and
although two of the London fire brigades were telephoned
for, the military, with the aid of hoses and hydrants, had
already checked the spreading of the flames. The actual
amount of damage done, happily, fell far short of what
might have been expected, considering the force of the
explosion, and the great age of the building attacked.
The windows and casements were nearly all blown out, the
flagstaff at the top of the White Tower was blown away,
the floor was burnt, and the face of the clock was damaged;
and this was the extent of the hurt caused by the
dastardly attempt to wreck the White Tower. The report
of the explosion is described as being like the firing of a
heavy piece of artillery, being followed by a flame of fire
that rose up through the open well that communicates
between the second and third floors in the centre of the
two halls. This flame was immediately succeeded by a
shivering of all the glass in the windows, the crashing of
the woodwork, and the falling of hundreds of rifles from
the armoury racks, while a dense cloud of dust darkened
the interior of the building, and made it impossible for
the visitors or officials to discover where the explosion had
occurred. A wild panic ensued, and as the dust gradually
cleared away, the people rushed in a wild helter-skelter
down the staircase, and poured out of the Tower. Meanwhile,
the warders and police arrived to the succour of
the injured, whom they had to draw out from beneath the
wreckage. Directly after the explosion the bugles sounded
the assembly, and the Grenadiers, who formed the garrison,
turned out. Lord Chelmsford, the Lieutenant of the
Tower, and General Milman, its Major, caused flying
sentries to be posted at every avenue and point of egress
admitting to the Tower. Orders were given to close the
gates, and no one was to be allowed to leave the fortress
under any pretext. The perpetrator of the outrage was
a scoundrel, who, two years before, had been concerned
in the outrage of a similar nature on the Underground
-----File: 257.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>Breaking into the Strong room in the "Jewel Tower"
and Removal of the Regalia, on the night of the Fire, Oct^r 30 1841</i>][** F1 Cursive font: 2 x images]
-----File: 258.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 259.png---------------------------------------------------------
Railway, when bombs had been placed at Charing Cross
and Praed Street stations. He was sentenced to fourteen
years' penal servitude with hard labour, and was released
in the month of March 1899. That the White Tower
escaped, and the people in it, with so little injury, was a
miracle, for the charge of dynamite was a strong one.

Crime, like history, repeats itself. Amongst the
manuscripts kept at Hatfield House is the following
declaration:--

"1593-4 Feb. 6. John Danyell, Irishman, came to me,
Richard Young, the 6th day of February 1593, and
gave me to understand of a plot that is pretended for the
firing of the Tower--viz. that there is a vault wherein
brimstone doth lie, and there is gunpowder under it. And
he says that there is a trap door that doth stand much
open, and is purposed that two men like labourers shall
come in as though they were workmen in the Tower, and
shall cast certain balls into the vault where the brimstone
lieth, and in a short time it will take fire and consume all."

From this it will be seen that the intention of one
criminal in the reign of Queen Elizabeth was carried out
by another nearly three hundred years later, in the reign
of Queen Victoria.


THE END.
-----File: 260.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 261.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDICES
-----File: 262.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 263.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 264.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <sc>The Great Court of the Tower.</sc>]
-----File: 265.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX I

/#
DISPUTES BETWEEN THE CITY OF LONDON AND THE
OFFICIALS OF THE TOWER AS TO THE RIGHTS
AND PRIVILEGES OF THE TOWER
#/


"This dispute as to the Liberties and Privileges of the Tower began
as early as 1465-66, the fifth of Edward IV. Early in Queen Elizabeth's
reign it was renewed; the points of controversy are referred to in the
above letter (a letter from the Lord Mayor to the Lords of the Council
complaining of the conduct of Sir William George, Porter of the Tower
of London, regarding his usurpation of the Liberties and Franchises of the
City by 'compelling poor victuallers strangers, coming to London by ship
or boat with fish, fruit, or such victuals, to give him such a quantity as
pleased him to take, as two or three cod-fish from each boat, etc., without
payment. Such as refused he caused to be imprisoned in the Tower,
whereby the victuallers were discouraged to come to the City, and their
number decreased, to the great hurt of the markets and the victualling of
the City, especially at this present time of Lent'). The Council referred
the question to the consideration of the Lord Chief-Justice of the Queen's
Bench (Sir Christopher Wray), the Lord Chief of the Common Pleas
(Sir Edward Anderson), and the Master of the Rolls (Sir Gilbert Gerard),
who gave their opinion upon some of the privileges claimed by the
Lieutenant, but not upon the question of boundaries. They reported
with respect to the claims of freedom from arrest by action in the City,
and protections granted by the Lieutenant to officers and attendants in
the Tower, and not obeying writs of <i>habeas corpus</i>; that in their opinion,
persons daily attendant in the Tower, and serving the Queen there, should
be privileged, and not arrested on any plaint in London, but this should
not apply to writs of execution or <i>capias utlagatum</i>; that the Lieutenant
ought to return every <i>habeas corpus</i> out of any court at Westminster, so
that the justices before whom it should be returned might either remand
it with the body, or retain the matter before them, and deliver the body.
They further gave their opinion that the claim of the Lieutenant, that if
a person privileged in the Tower were arrested in London, he might
detain any citizen found within the Tower until the other was delivered,
was altogether against the laws of the realm. The Lords of the Council
-----File: 266.png---------------------------------------------------------
made an order settling these controversies, which was dated from Nonsuch,
October 3rd, 1585. The question of boundaries still remained in dispute.
Stowe quotes documents, which he says he had seen among the Records
in the Tower, from which it would appear that the bounds in controversy
were at Little Tower Hill, the Postern, and East Smithfield on one side,
and on the other the extent of Tower Hill, and towards Barking Church.
The City claimed the Postern Gate in the end of the London Wall by
the Tower, and houses built near to the Wall and Postern; all the void
ground within the Postern Gate--viz. the whole hill and ground where the
scaffold for the execution of traitors stood, and where the Sheriffs of London
received prisoners from the Tower to be executed (from which place the
boundary stone had been removed), with the Watergate and the gardens
under the London Wall. The City also claimed that the whole ground
and soil called Tower Hill without the Postern Gate, being parcel of East
Smithfield, was theirs. They likewise objected to the Lieutenant holding
pleas in the court of the Tower, that being only a Court Baron, and not
a Court of Record; also to the exactions taken in the name of prizage
of victuallers bringing victuals, fuel, and other things by water. The
Lieutenant disputed the original position of the Postern in question, and
asserted that the City's proofs brought from their own manuscripts,
etc., were insufficient to dispossess any subject, much less the King. He
also submitted the presentment made by an inquest held anno 27 Henry
VIII., before Sir Anthony (William) Kingston, High Constable of the
Tower, which stated that the bounds began 'at the Watergate next the
Ramshead, in Petty Wales; and so streyched North unto a Mudwall called
Pykes Garden, on this side of Crutched Friars; and so strait East unto
the Wall of London, with nine gardens above the Postern, and above the
<i>Broken Tower</i>, right unto the midst of Hog Lane End, and so strait unto
the Thames, and so six foot without the Stairs at the East-gate of the
Tower towards St Katherine's.' In the reign of King James the Second
the subject was again before the Privy Council, who on the 12th May
1686, directed the boundaries to be ascertained, which was done, and
the broad arrow in iron, with the date, set on the houses. On the 13th
October in the same year a warrant was issued by King James the Second,
for a charter to be prepared for confirming the same. This Charter, dated
10th June 1687, exempted the limits defined in the schedule (and which
were practically those claimed by the Lieutenant) from the jurisdiction
of the City, and of the Justices, etc., of Middlesex; directed that the
Governor of the Tower, or his deputies, should execute and return all
writs, processes, etc., within the limits; that a Session of the Peace should
be held four times a year within the Liberty of the Tower, and that the
Justices of the Peace should have power to commit traitors, felons, etc.,
to Newgate. It also established a Court of Record within the Liberties,
the Steward of the Court being the Coroner, the Governor of the Tower
having the appointment of the officers. Whilst the duties of the Justices
of the Peace, as defined by the charter, have been from time to time added
-----File: 267.png---------------------------------------------------------
to by the Acts 13 George II. cap. 19. sec. 7, 37 George II. cap. 25, sec.
13-16, and by sundry licensing Acts, their powers have been limited by
the Police Act (10 George IV. cap. 44) and supplementary Police Acts.
The Central Criminal Court Act, 4 and 5 William IV. cap. 36, included
the Liberty of the Tower within the jurisdiction of that Court, and took
away the power of its Justices to try at their Sessions offences under the
Act. This, however, has been somewhat modified by subsequent Acts."
-----File: 268.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 269.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX II


/*  [** F1 all centred]
The
Behaviour <i>and</i> Character
of
<i>Samuel M'[** ^c ?]Pherson</i>,}
<i>Malcolm M'[** ?]Pherson</i>   } and {<i>Farquar Shaw</i>,
the
Three Highland Deserters;
who were
<i>Shot at the</i> Tower, July <i>the 18th</i>, 1743.

with

Some Observations on the <i>Conduct</i> of a certain <i>Stranger</i>, who advised
the Prisoners to wave any Defence they had, and to plead guilty.

Also

<i>A plain</i> Narrative <i>of the Original Institution of the Regiment, now commanded
by my Lord S----. Containing an Impartial Account of the
Rise and Progress of the late Mutiny in that Regiment</i>.

To which is added,

The two Petitions which they sent to the Lords of the <i>Regency</i>,
and to the Dutchess of <i>Richmond</i>.

By the Clergyman of the Church of <i>Scotland</i>, who conversed with them
in their own Language from the Time of their Sentence till their
Execution.

<i>Nil turpe commitas neque coramalias neque tecum maxime
omnium reverere teipsum.</i>

London
Printed for M. Cooper in <i>Pater-Noster-Row</i>, 1743
Price Six-pence.
*/
-----File: 270.png---------------------------------------------------------

/*  [** F1 all centred]
The
Behaviour and Character
of the
Three Highlanders,
Who were Shot, on July 18th, 1743.
*/

The many inconsistent and scandalous Reports that are spread about
Town, both in Print and Conversation, concerning the Characters and
Behaviour of the three unhappy young Men who suffer'd in the Tower
of <i>London</i> on <i>Monday</i> the 18th of <i>July</i>, make it necessary as well for
Information of the Public, as out of Charity to their Memories, to publish
the following Sheets.

The Author of this Tract thinks it necessary to premise, that he means
not in the Relation he intends to make of this Affair, either to justify
the Crime for which these Men suffer'd; or, in the least, to arraign the
Justice of the Court-Martial in their Proceedings; or tax the Sentence
with Severity; but, from a Motive of Christian Charity and Love for
Truth, means to remove from the Character of the Deceased, such
false Aspersions as are cast upon them, either by the Malice or Ignorance
of some, who think it not only necessary for the Vindication of public
Justice, to represent these unhappy Men as Mutineers and Deserters,
but must paint them as Men void of every other Virtue, and addicted
to the grossest Vices.

In order to give the Reader a just Idea of this Corps of Men, it
will not be improper to go back as far as their original Institution,
by which we shall be the better enabled to form a just Notion of
their Character.

Few that are in the least acquainted with the History or Constitution
of <i>Scotland</i> but know, that anciently all the Lands in that Kingdom
were held of the Crown by Military Tenures, or Knights Service; and
that the Vassals of these great Men held their Lands of them by the
same kind of Tenures.

By this Means, the Nobility of that Kingdom had always a Number
of Men ready to bring into the Field, either in defence of their <i>Sovereign</i>,
or to decide their own private Quarrels with one another, at which
the Crown always conniv'd (for political Reasons) until both Parties
were reduced to an equal and moderate Share of Power.

This Practice of Subjects deciding their private Quarrels by the
Sword, obtained anciently all over <i>Britain</i> and most other Countries,
until Civil Polity and more wholesome Laws prevailed: and still
remained in the <i>South</i> parts, and towards the Borders of <i>Scotland</i>, till
-----File: 271.png---------------------------------------------------------
near the Time of the Union of the Crowns in the Person of King
<i>James</i> the First, when the chief Men in those Parts were diverted
from their private Animosities, by their necessary Attendance on the
Court, now removed at a greater Distance from them.

However, this Spirit of Family Feuds still prevailed in the <i>Highlands</i>,
and more remote Parts of <i>Scotland</i>, who, by their Distance from the
Court, were unacquainted with the Manners of the civiliz'd Part of
the Nation.

The inferior Chieftains in these Parts still determined their mutual
Quarrels as usual: and in revenge of any Affront, made Incursions and
Depredations into the Estates of one another, or connived at their
Followers doing so, to the great Discouragement of Industry, and
Disturbance of the public Peace.

In this Situation were Things in that Part of the Country about
the Time of the Union of the Kingdoms, when the Government very
wisely, by the Act called the <i>Clan-Act</i>, abolished these Tenures, and
for preventing these Depredations last mentioned, raised several Independent
Companies in the <i>Highlands</i>, the command of which were given
to some of the most considerable Gentlemen in that Corner, such as
Lord <i>Loveat</i>, Laird of <i>Grant</i>, <i>Lochnell</i>, <i>Farah</i>, etc., all men of Distinction
and Weight, who were willing to engage their Personal and Family
Influence, as well as that of their Companies, for suppressing those
Quarrels, and settling a Civil Polity in the Country.

When this Levy was made, the Officers took a special Care that
none should be enlisted into that Service, but the Sons of the wealthiest
and most reputable Farmers in the Country; and the second and
younger Sons of some of the lesser Vassals were not asham'd to enlist
in a service calculated for restoring of Peace, and establishing Liberty
and Property in their Country. And as they were allowed to occupy
their own Farms or follow any other Occupation, except upon Muster-Days,
or when they were actually employed in pursuit of Robbers, or
Disturbers of the public Peace; they, instead of receiving Bounty-Money,
made Interest with the Officer to be admitted.

In this Shape they continued till they were Regimented, under the
Command of the Honourable the Earl of <i>Crawford</i>, a Nobleman, whose
Character was every way agreeable to them, and made little or no
Alteration in their Circumstances.

When we have taken this View of their Original and History, down
to the Period of their being Regimented, it will be no Matter of Surprize
to find the private Men of that Regiment differing much in their Manners
-----File: 272.png---------------------------------------------------------
from those of other Corps, if we consider that when they entered the
Service it was impossible for them to have the least Apprehensions of
ever being obliged to leave their own Country where most of them had
Farms or other Concerns, and looked upon themselves, and I believe
were esteemed by the Country, only as a regulated Militia, at least till
such Time as they were Regimented, which was only a few Years ago.

The Earl of <i>Crawford</i> enjoyed that Regiment but a short time, when
it was given to their present Colonel the Honourable Lord <i>Semple</i>.

They were quartered last year, the one half of them at <i>Inverness</i>, and
the other at <i>Perth</i>; some Time in Spring the Regiment was informed by
their officers that they were to be reviewed at <i>Musselburgh</i>, a village within
four miles of <i>Edinburgh</i>, and afterwards to return to their quarters.

Accordingly they had a Rout given them to that place, and arrived
there; but were told they were not to be reviewed there, but at <i>Berwick</i>
upon <i>Tweed</i>; when they came to this place, they were told that his
Majesty designed to review them in Person at <i>London</i>, and that then they
would all return to their Families.

When they arrived at <i>London</i>, and found that his Majesty was gone,
the Regiment were universally dissatisfied, that after so long a March
they were disappointed of the Honour of being reviewed by his Majesty.

Some Time after their coming here a Report was currently spread that
the Regiment was to be sent to some Parts of the <i>West-Indies</i>, and broke
or divided amongst the Colonies; which raised in the private Men, who
believed this Report, a very great Animosity against their Officers, whom
they groundlessly blamed for not informing them truly where they were to
go before they carried them from their own Country; and not allowing
them Time to settle their Concerns, of which some had very considerable,
which they were obliged to leave in great Disorder, they thought the
Interest of the Government did no ways require that they, more than any
other Regiment in <i>Britain</i> should be left ignorant of the Rout they were
to take, and by that means be disappointed of an Opportunity of settling
their private affairs in a manner suitable to so long an Absence; that they
had been so long settled in that Country without any View of being so
suddenly called from it, that it amounted to as great a Hardship on them
(comparatively speaking) as it would be to the Militia of the City of
<i>London</i> to be shipped for the <i>Indies</i> on an Hour's Warning.

The Officers took pains to allay this flame, by assuring the Men that
so soon as the Review was over they would be allowed to return Home.

But when the Report of their Embarkation prevailed, they were out of
-----File: 273.png---------------------------------------------------------
all Patience, and looked upon the Design of sending them to <i>Flanders</i>
only as a Blind to get them on board, in order to ship them really for the
<i>West-Indies</i>.

Tho' their Officers attempted to undeceive them, yet they had been
disappointed so often, and filled so long with Hopes of going Home, that
they had no Credit with them.

Add to this, that there was another Complaint pretended for the
Ground of their Discontent, that some small Arrears were due to them,
that they had all been obliged to use their own Swords, and that their
Cloathing, especially their Shoes and Plaids, were remarkably deficient,
these last not being worth Six-pence <i>per</i> Yard; whereas they used to be
allowed Plaids of more than double that Value.

This Spirit continued after the Review, when the Discontented agreed
upon <i>Tuesday</i> Night after to meet at <i>Finchley Common</i>, where a great
Number of them convened and waited till their Number increased. In
this interval some of their Officers came up, and by their persuasions a
great Number returned; However, about a 100 of them continued their
first Resolution of returning to their own Country.

Here it is remarkable that the Night was so dark that they scarce could
distinguish Faces, or make any Computation of their Number, and that
<i>Malcolm M'Pherson</i>, one of the Deceased had never hitherto given any
Consent to go away, but came within some Distance of the Place where
the Men were assembled, and with another in Company, continued irresolute
what Course to take until the coming up of the Officers had raised
some Ferment, upon which he came into the Crowd, and allowed himself
to be hurried along without knowing where he was going.

Next Morning when by Day-Light they could discern their Number,
and not finding the Desertion so general as they expected, <i>Samuel
M'Pherson</i>, another of the Deceased, advised the whole Body strenuously
to return to their Duty, which Advice he continued to inculcate during
their March to <i>Lady Wood</i>; and in a short Time after they came there,
he applied to a Justice of the Peace to propose terms of surrender; and
during all their Stay there, used his utmost Endeavours to prevent Things
coming to the last Extremity.

At last being in some Hopes of a Pardon by the Intervention of his
Grace the Duke of <i>Montague</i>, to whom Application was made in their
behalf, they surrendered on Discretion, in which <i>Samuel M'Pherson</i> was
the most instrumental, as will be acknowledged by the Officers to whom
he surrendered.
-----File: 274.png---------------------------------------------------------

They were brought soon after to the Tower, and a Court Martial
appointed to try them.

The first Day the Court Martial sat, a Person, a Stranger to all the
Prisoners, came to the Grate, and pretending a great deal of Concern
for their Misfortunes, advised them not to mention on their Trial any
complaint they might have against their Officers, intimating, that he was
certain such a Plea would not avail them, and without serving them would
expose their Officers.

That the wisest Course they could follow for their own Safety, would
be to acknowledge their Guilt, and plead mercy of the Court Martial,
which he assured them would effectually work their Deliverance that no
Punishment would be inflicted on them, and at the same Time presented
them with a Petition which he had already drawn, addressed to the Court
Martial in these terms, and they very frankly relying on these assurances
signed and delivered the same to that honourable Court.

One of their Officers came next day to the Tower, and inculcated the
same Doctrine into the Prisoners that the Stranger had done before,
assuring them that they would all be liberate in a short time, when all
Justice should be done them.

The Prisoners were examined before the Court Martial one by one;
the Questions asked them were to this Purpose, Was you enlisted? Have
you taken the Oaths? Have you received your Pay? Had you your
Cloathing regularly? To all which they answered in the Affirmative:
They were asked if they had any Complaints against their Officers, they
all answered in the Negative, and in general pleaded nothing in Alleviation
of their Crime before the Court Martial, but Inadvertency, and that
they were moved to it by a Report which prevailed of their being sent to
the <i>West-Indies</i>, and into a Climate destructive of their Health.

I cannot help in this Place to take notice of the remarkable Officiousness
of this Stranger. He takes upon him without being asked, or the
least apparent Interest in the Prisoners, to advise them in Matters of the
last Consequence to them, their Lives and Reputation; has the Rashness
to prejudge the Opinion of the Honourable the Court Martial in a Point
of Law, which is at least a moot Point amongst the Lawyers themselves.

How unreasonable was it for any Man to pretend to determine what
Weight any Plea would have before a Court of Judicature determining in
a Case of Life and Death; and how unjust to the Prisoners, to advise
them to conceal any Circumstance in their Case that might have the
smallest Tendency towards alleviating their Crimes, or raising the smallest
Motions of Compassion towards them in the Breasts of their Judges!
-----File: 275.png---------------------------------------------------------

Suppose there had been but little Weight in the Plea of their Want
of Pay, yet still it was a Circumstance closely connected with their Crime,
without which it was impossible to form a just Judgment of the Heinousness
of that Action. For it must be granted on the one hand, that a
Soldier who deserts and cannot plead Want of Pay, etc., is less excusable,
and consequently deserves a greater Degree of Punishment than he who
has such a Pretence; this must be granted, tho' it should be admitted on
the other hand, that there is not so much in this Plea, as to skreen the
Criminals totally from Punishment; But how much, or little is in it, is
a Case few wise Men will determine dogmatically, especially against the
Prisoner, since History, either antient or modern, does not afford any one
Instance of Capital Punishments inflicted on Soldiers who mutinied for
Want of Pay.

It is true, the Pay they want is but small; by their own Account ten
or twelve shillings, some less, some a trifle more, which I mention out of
Justice to the Officers, because it was currently reported in Town that the
Deficiency was much more considerable. But however trifling this and
their other Complaints may seem to Men not concerned, yet I cannot but
reckon it barbarous to have advised them to conceal these Circumstances,
the Relation of which could not be supposed to have been capable of
making the Court Martial less merciful to the Prisoners, if it had not the
contrary effect.

But however that Plea was waved, and did not fall under the cognizance
of the Court Martial who made their Report, the Consequence of which
was, that on <i>Tuesday</i> the 12th, a Warrant was directed by their Excellencies
the Lords of the Regency to the Governor of the Tower, for the
Execution of <i>Samuel M'[**^c ?]Pherson</i>, <i>Malcolm M'[** ?]Pherson</i>, both Corporals, and
<i>Farquar Shaw</i>, a private Centinel, all three of the Number of the Deserters,
upon <i>Monday</i> the 18th of <i>July</i> last.

Having thus impartially traced this Meeting from its Rise to this Period,
it remains that we give some Account of the Character and Behaviour of
these three unfortunate Criminals from the Intimation of their Sentence to
their Execution.

<i>Samuel M'[** ?]Pherson</i>, aged about twenty-nine Years, unmarried, was born
in the Parish of <i>Laggan</i> in <i>Badenuck</i> and Shire of <i>Inverness</i>; his Father
still living, is Brother to <i>M'[** ?]Pherson</i> of <i>Breachie</i>, a Gentleman of a considerable
Estate in that County, and is himself a Man of unblemished Reputation,
and a plentiful Fortune.

<i>Samuel</i> was the only Son of a first Marriage, and received a genteel
Education, having made some Progress in the Languages, and studied for
some Time at <i>Edinburgh</i> with a Writer (that is, an Attorney), until about
-----File: 276.png---------------------------------------------------------
six Years ago he enlisted as a Volunteer in Major <i>Grant's</i> Company, where
he was much respected both by the Officers and private men, and was in
a short Time made a Corporal.

<i>Malcolm M'[** ?]Pherson</i>, aged about 30 Years, and unmarried, was likewise
born in the same Parish of <i>Laggan</i>, was Son of Angus <i>M'[** ?]Pherson</i> of
<i>Driminard</i>, a Gentleman of Credit and Repute, who bestowed upon
<i>Malcolm</i> such Education as that Part of the Country would afford.
He enlisted about seven Years ago in my Lord <i>Loveat's</i> Company, where
his Behaviour recommended him to the Esteem of his Officers, and was
soon made a Corporal.

<i>Farquar Shaw</i>, aged about 35 Years, unmarried, was born in the
Parish of <i>Rothmurchius</i> in <i>Strathspey</i>, and Shire of <i>Inverness</i>. His Father,
<i>Alexander Shaw</i>, was an honest Farmer, but gave his Son no Education,
as living at a Distance from Schools, and not in a Condition to maintain
him elsewhere; <i>Farquar</i> lived some time by droving, but meeting with
Misfortunes in that Business, was reduced, and obliged, for Subsistance, to
enlist in this regiment, where he has lived till now without any Reproach.

The Sentence was intimated to them upon <i>Tuesday</i> before their
Execution. This unexpected Change of their Fortunes, from hopes of
Life and Liberty, to that of a short Preparation for a violent Death, very
much shock'd their Resolution; but <i>Samuel</i> less than any of them:
When the Warder went to acquaint <i>Samuel</i> of this melancholy News,
he carry'd with him two Centinels, for fear any Accident might happen;
and after expressing his Concern for being the Messenger of such unhappy
News, acquainted him, he must die. He started with Surprize; and asked,
with some Emotion, <i>How must I die? You are to be shot, Sir.</i>--Then he
reply'd, pretty composedly, <i>God's Will be done; I have brought this upon
myself</i>. He then asked, If he might be allowed Pen and Ink; and when
the Post went for <i>Scotland</i>? The Warder told him the Night; but that
he could not live to receive any Return: He said, he did not want any.
He very pleasantly gave the Warder what Weapons he had, which were
only a small Penknife and a Razor: and before the Warder parted with
him seem'd to have assumed his ordinary Calmness of Mind; and he and
the other two, after some Reflection, and the Conversation of the Clergy
(who from this time attended them) were reconciled so much to their
Circumstances, as to be able to bear the thoughts of Death with great
Decency, and Christian Resignation to the Will of God.

<i>Samuel</i> owned he had been active at the Beginning of the Sedition;
but he could not help sometimes thinking, that the great Pains he took to
influence the Men to return to their Duty afterwards, in a great Measure,
alleviated his first Crime.
-----File: 277.png---------------------------------------------------------

<i>Malcolm</i>, to the last declared that he never advised any Person to
go away; on the contrary, that he never was resolved himself, till the
moment he joined the Men in their March from <i>Finchley Common</i>, and
then his Reflection was so short, that he scarce knew what he did.

<i>Farquar Shaw</i>, in the same manner, declared, That he was no way
active in raising the Meeting: That he never advis'd any Man to desert;
deny'd that he presented his Piece to any of the Officers, as it was
reported. He owned, that he might have utter'd some very passionate
and indecent Expressions to some of the Officers who commanded him
to return; but that these expressions did not import a threatening to
strike any of them.

But notwithstanding that they all three imagin'd themselves no more
guilty than the rest of the Prisoners, yet they never once utter'd the least
Reflection against the Sentence, the Court Martial, or the Lords of the
Regency; in short, they did not Attribute their Death to anything else
but the divine Providence of God, to which they chearfully submitted, and
acquitted all Mankind of their unhappy End; of which <i>Farquar Shaw</i>
gave a lively Instance: It being reported to him, that one Serjeant
<i>Mc.Bean</i> had deposed before the Court Martial, that he (<i>Shaw</i>) had
presented his Piece to him, when he commanded him to return to his
Duty; and that this Deposition had determined the Court Martial to fix upon
him in particular; he sent for the Serjeant, and very calmly questioned
him concerning this Fact; Who told him that he had never been an
Evidence against him, but own'd, that he told some of his Officers, that
he (<i>Shaw</i>) had threaten'd to strike an officer who commanded him to return
to his Duty; and that it was probable, the Colonel might receive this
Intelligence from the Officers, and that by this means it might come to the
Knowledge of the Court Martial: The Serjeant express'd his Regret,
that he should be any way instrumental to his misfortunes. But <i>Shaw</i>, in
an affable Manner, desir'd him to give himself no Uneasiness on that
Head: That he had neither Spite nor Ill-will at him for what he had
said, but would die in perfect Love and Friendship with him, and all
Mankind: That he had sent for him on purpose to make his Mind easy
and not to trouble himself with needless Reflections, since he heartily
forgave him; and accordingly parted with him in the most friendly and
amicable manner and frequently after express'd to me his Concern for the
Serjeant, lest his Reflections on himself should prejudice him, or make
him uneasy. This behaviour of his, to the Man whom he was convinc'd
had been the principal Cause of his Death, must argue a most charitable,
forgiving, and generous Temper and Disposition of Mind, very seldom to
be met with in Men of more elevated Stations in Life.

They all three were Men of strong natural Parts, and religiously
disposed both from Habit and Principle, the natural Result of a good
-----File: 278.png---------------------------------------------------------
Example and early Instruction in the Doctrine and Precepts of
Christianity; for I received from all of them a great deal of Satisfaction
when I examined them on the Grounds of our holy Religion; and even
<i>Shaw</i>, who was perfectly illiterate and could neither read nor write, was
ignorant of no Christian Doctrine necessary to Salvation, or from whence
he could draw Comfort in his present Circumstance. They were
educated, and died Members of the Church of <i>Scotland</i>, tho' they chearfully
embraced the Opportunity of receiving the Sacrament from the
Hands of the Reverend Mr. <i>Paterson</i>, who officiated for the Chaplain
of the Tower, after the Form of the Church (<i>sic</i>) <i>England</i>, on the <i>Sunday</i>
preceding their Execution.

As their Notions of Religion were sincere, so they expressed the
greatest Regard for Honesty and Integrity, and thanked God, tho' they
were great Sinners, that his restraining Grace had enabled them to avoid
all vicious and prophane Courses or the offering any Injury to their
Neighbours in their Persons or Properties; that they hoped they had not
only the Approbation of (<i>sic</i>) of a good Conscience, but the Testimony of
their Officers, Friends and Acquaintance, that they have lived all their
Life-time without Scandal to themselves, or Reproach to their Friends,
until this unhappy Period, when Rashness, without any Mixture of
Malice, Cowardice, or Disaffection to his Majesty's Person or Government,
had brought their Lives to this miserable Catastrophe.

They applied themselves diligently to the Duty of Prayer and reading
the Scripture, from the Time of their Sentence, which they said they had
but too much and too long neglected.

When they were all three brought to one Ward near the Place of
Execution, about four o'Clock that Morning, they expressed the greatest
Affection and Sympathy for one another, each regretting the case of the
other two more than his own; at the same time encouraged one another
to Constancy of Mind, and a dutiful Resignation to the Hand of God.

<i>Samuel M'[**^c ?]Pherson</i> ordered three Coffins to be made of fifteen Shillings
Value each, for which he paid; and <i>Malcolm</i> made a Will, which he
deposited in the Hands of three of his own Name among the <i>Highland</i>
Prisoners, some Days before their Execution.

These three were admitted to visit the Prisoners, who told them
that they thanked God that they had got the better of the Fears of Death,
and were prepared to embrace it chearfully; that they thought their Case
better than that of their Fellows, as they were leaving this World in Hopes
of Eternal Peace and Happiness, whilst they were to remain here exposed
to new Temptations and new Troubles in distant and unknown Countries,
where they would not enjoy Life, but a lingering Death. They applied
by Petition to several Persons of Quality, of which the two following are
true Copies.
-----File: 279.png---------------------------------------------------------

/#
<i>To their Excellencies the Lords Justices.</i>

The humble Petition of <i>Samuel M'Pherson</i>, <i>Malcolm M'Pherson</i>,
and <i>Farquar Shaw</i>.

[** F1 no indent]<i>May it please your Lordships</i>,

That, whereas your poor Petitioners lie under Sentence of Death for
Mutiny and Desertion, and have nothing to hope (under the Almighty)
but from your Lordships' Favour on our Behalf, which we do most humbly
intreat. And as we are sincerely sorry for our base Conduct and Misbehaviour,
and it being our first Crime, we hope for your Lordships' kind
Indulgence, which should we be so happy as to obtain, we do sincerely
promise to retrieve this our Misconduct by a steady Attachment to our
most gracious Sovereign King <i>George</i>, by defending him and his Royal
House with all our Power, where and in whatever manner we shall be
directed.

/*
<i>Samuel M'Pherson.</i>
<i>Malcolm M'Pherson.</i>
<i>Farquar Shaw.</i>
*/
#/

/#
<i>To her Grace the Dutchess of</i> Richmond,

The humble Petition of <i>Samuel M'Pherson</i>, <i>Malcolm M'Pherson</i>,
and <i>Farquar Shaw</i>.

[** F1 no indent]<i>May it please your Grace</i>,

That, whereas your poor Petitioners lie under Sentence of Death for
Mutiny and Desertion, and have nothing to hope (under the Almighty)
but from your Grace's charitable Intercession to the Lords Justices on our
Behalf, we do most humbly intreat your Grace's good Offices. And as we
are sincerely sorry for our base Conduct and Misbehaviour, and it being
our first Crime, we hope for your Grace's kind Indulgence, which, should
we be so happy as to obtain, we do sincerely promise to retrieve this our
Misconduct by a steady Attachment to our most gracious Sovereign King
<i>George</i>, by defending him and his Royal House with all our Power, where
and in whatever manner we shall be directed.

/*
<i>Samuel M'Pherson.</i>
<i>Malcolm M'Pherson.</i>
<i>Farquar Shaw.</i>
*/
#/

Upon the <i>Monday</i> Morning the Governor ordered them to put on
their Shrouds below their Cloaths, which when done, they immediately
began to pray, and continued in that Exercise very devoutly and fervently
till six o'Clock, when they were called out to Execution. They walked
to the Place close up to the Chapel in the Tower without expressing the
least Horror or Despondency in their Gaite or Countenance, but with a
Christian Composure and Resignation of Mind. Here <i>Samuel M'Pherson</i>
-----File: 280.png---------------------------------------------------------
standing on the Plank which was appointed for them to kneel on, with an
assured Countenance and in an audible Voice, in his own Language,
addressed his Fellow-Prisoners that were drawn up round the Place of
Execution, in this Manner:

/#
[** F1 no indent]<i>My Friends and Countrymen</i>,

You are not Strangers to the Cause of my Sufferings with these
my Companions; I hope the Anguish you must feel at the Sight of
this shocking Scene, will be the last of your Punishment; for I am
convinced you must think it a Punishment to see us bleed: But my
Blood, I hope, will contribute to your Liberty; That Thought affords
me as much Satisfaction as a Soul prepared to take a Flight to Eternity
can receive from any Earthly Concerns.--Take Example from our unfortunate
Ends, and endeavour to conduct yourselves so, both before
God and Man, as your Lives may be long, and your Deaths natural.
Next to your Duty to God, discharge what you owe your King and
Country; wipe off this Reproach by a steady Loyalty to his Sacred
Majesty, and a respectful and obedient Conduct towards your Officers.
#/

Having uttered this Speech, he, with his Cousin <i>M'Pherson</i> and <i>Shaw</i>,
kneeled down, whilst the Reverend Mr <i>Paterson</i> and myself joined in
Prayer, kneeling before them on a Plank: When Prayers were over,
their Faces were cover'd; when Eighteen Soldiers, in three Ranks,
(Twelve of whom were appointed to do the Execution, and the other
Six for a Reserve, had been kept out of Sight for fear of shocking the
Prisoners) advanced on their Tiptoes, and with the least Noise possible,
their Pieces ready cock'd for fear of the Click disturbing the Prisoners,
Serjeant-Major <i>Ellisson</i>, (who deserv'd the greatest Commendation for
this Precaution) waved a Handkerchief as a Signal <i>to present</i>; and,
after a very short Pause, waved it a second time as a Signal <i>to fire</i>; when
they all three fell instantly backwards as dead; but <i>Shaw</i> being observed
to move his Hand, one of the Six in Reserve advanc'd, and shot him
thro' the Head, as another did <i>Samuel M'Pherson</i>. After the Execution,
an Officer order'd three of the Prisoners, Name-sakes of the Deceased,
to advance and bury them; whom they presently stripp'd to their Shrouds,
put them in their Coffins, and buried them in one Grave, near the Place
they were shot, with great Decency. The Officers on Duty appeared
greatly affected, and three Hundred of the Third Regiment of <i>Scotch</i>
Guards, who were drawn up in three Lines in the Shape of a half Moon,
attended the Execution, many of whom, of the harden'd Sort, were
observed to shed Tears.

Thus ended this melancholy Scene, which raised Compassion from all,
and drew Tears from many of the Spectators. They had by their courteous
Behaviour, gained so much upon the Affections of their Warders, the
Inhabitants of the Tower, and others that conversed with them, that none
-----File: 281.png---------------------------------------------------------
were so hard-hearted as to deny them their Pity, nay, nor hardly had any
Resolution to see them executed.

What made this Spectacle still more moving was, that Mixture of
Devotion, Agony, and Despair that was seen in the Faces and Actions
of the remaining <i>Highland</i> Prisoners, who were ranged within side the
Guards. When Prayers began, they all fell on their Knees and Elbows,
hanging their Heads and covering their Faces with their Bonnets, and might
easily be observed that they could not refrain from the loudest Lamentations.
Such a number of young Men, in so suppliant a Posture, offering
their Prayers so fervently to Heaven, with such Marks of Sorrow for the
Fate of the unhappy Criminals, had a prodigious effect upon the Spectators,
and I am hopeful will influence the Practice and Conversation of all that
saw them; and to the Praise of these poor Men, (take from them the
Account (<i>sic</i>) their heinous transgression of Mutiny and Desertion) I
believe their courteous and modest Behaviour, their virtuous and pious
Principles, and religious Disposition, would be no bad Pattern for Men
above the Rank of private Centinels, and ought to be a severer Reproof to
many who live here, and have all the Advantages of a liberal Education,
and the Example of a polite Court; that Men they esteem barbarous,
inhabiting a distant and barren Country, should outdo them in real politeness,
that is, in the Knowledge and Practice of the Doctrines of Christianity.

From hence we may remark, that those who published or propagated
so many scandalous Reports of these unhappy young Men, must either
have taken little Pains to inform themselves of the Truth, or must be
possessed of little Charity, when they load their Memory with so many
Assertions no way connected with their Crime. But, as this Relation is
published from the Prisoners' own Mouths, and attested by a Person whose
Profession and Character ought to screen him from the Imputations of
Partiality or Falsehood, it is hoped these Impressions will wear off of the
minds of the Public, and give place to sentiments of Charity for their
Crimes, and Compassion for their Sufferings.

<i>Magna est Veritas, et prævalebit.</i>

FINIS
-----File: 282.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 283.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX III

/#
<sc>Dates of Restorations carried on by H.M. Office of
Works at the Tower of London to the present
time. For Details see Appendices IV.-V</sc>.
#/


/*
Under whose
direction works
executed.

Salvin.          Beauchamp Tower, restored                         1852
  Do.            Salt Tower          "                             1856
Taylor.          Chapel Royal        "                             1876
  Do.            Restoration of wall on River Front together with
                   the Cradle and Well Towers                      1878
  Do.            Broad Arrow Tower                                 1881-2
  Do.            Restoration of Lanthorn Tower                     1882-3
  Do.                Do.        Ballium Wall                       1886
  Do.            Well Tower 1887
  Do.            Restoration of Ballium wall between Wakefield
                   and Lanthorn Tower                              1888
  Do.            Restoration of S.W. Turret of White Tower         1895
  Do.            Restoration of S.E. Turret and base of White
                   Tower, S. and E.; also Stone Stairs on the S.   1896
J. R. Westcott.  North Wing of King's Tower lifted 15 in. on
                   E. front; restored                              1898-9
  Do.            Bloody Tower                                      1899-1900
*/

<i>Note.</i>--Certain new buildings have also lately been erected by the
War Office, including a new Main Guard, which is a permanent eyesore
to the Tower; this ugly building was completed in the year 1900,
and stands on the site of the old Main Guard.
-----File: 284.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <sc>Plan showing Recent Discoveries at the Tower.</sc>]
-----File: 285.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX IV

RECENT DISCOVERIES AT THE TOWER


Since the time when the late Prince Consort interested himself in the
restoration and preservation of the Tower, the Commissioners of Works
and Public Buildings have cleared away, from time to time, all useless and
modern portions which obscured certain parts of the ancient fabric. This
work was actually begun in the lifetime of the Prince Consort, under the
superintendence of Mr Salvin, who still continues to be consulted on all
the more important restorations. The works are now under the superintendence
of Mr John Taylor, the Surveyor to the Commissioners, who
is aided by Major-General Milman, Major of the Tower and the resident
military commander, all designs being submitted to the Sovereign before
being carried into execution. The various restorations, especially those
of the Beauchamp Tower and St Peter's Chapel, have been described in
the body of this work.

During the year, a range of buildings which stood against the east side
of the White Tower, and believed to have been built in the fourteenth or
fifteenth century, were pulled down, and it was found that the outer walls
were of the period generally assigned to the building, but that the inner
or west wall was of brick. This building, which extended on the south
side from the south-east turret of the White Tower to what was formerly
the Wardrobe Tower, and thence in a north-westerly direction with a
return wall to the north-east turret of the White Tower,--had been so
altered and patched that it no longer possessed any architectural or
antiquarian interest, and was entirely removed, except those portions of
the south walls and the ruins of the Wardrobe Tower, which form the
north wall of the Tower Armoury, erected in 1826.

Whilst this work of demolishing was being carried out, an interesting
discovery was made, Roman tiles and mortar being found, worked up into
the materials of which these walls were built. At the south-east corner,
and adjoining the remains of the Wardrobe Tower, a portion of Roman
wall was disclosed, having three courses of bonded tiles showing above
the surface of the <i>débris</i>. This piece of wall is in a direct westerly line
with the old city wall, shown in a plan of the Tower made in 1597,
the demolished buildings likewise appearing on this plan, which can be
seen in the office of the Commissioners of Works. Two inferences are
-----File: 286.png---------------------------------------------------------
possible from the discovery of this Roman work; either it is part of the
old city wall or the remains of a Roman building, and if it is satisfactorily
proved to be Roman, it will practically settle the contested point as to
whether there was ever a Roman fortress on the site of the White Tower
or not. Holinshed, in the third Book of his history of England, quoting
both Leyland and Fabyan, says, that Belins, who began to reign conjointly
with Brennus as King of Britain, which was "about the seventh
year of Artaxerxes, the seventh king of the Persians, builded a haven
with a gate within the city of Troinovant, now called London. This
gate was long after called Belins gate, and at length, by corruption of
language, Billingsgate. He builded also a castle westward from this
gate (as some have written) which was long time likewise called Belins
Castell, and is the same which we now call the Tower of London." It
was pointed out in the first volume of this work that Fitzstephen declared
the White Tower to have been built by Julius Cæsar, and that the mortar
used in the building was "tempered with the blood of beasts," but the
Roman habit of mixing powdered tiles with their mortar, may have given
rise to this theory. Stowe, in his survey of London about 1076, says,
that William the Conqueror caused the present White Tower to be erected
at the south-east angle of the city wall, which would be the actual spot
where the fragment of the recently discovered Roman wall now stands.

On removing the southern wall of this building, it was found that
it was built up to, and not bonded into the south-east turret of the White
Tower, which forms the apse of St John's Chapel. When it was taken
down, the original stone-work of the White Tower was laid bare. It is
quite honeycombed by age, Sir Christopher Wren having, of course, been
unable to reface it as he did the exposed portions of the Tower.

The Cradle Tower, which is the third tower on the southern side of
the outer Ballium wall, the others being the Develin and the Well Towers,
was opened out and restored in the year 1878. Before its restoration, the
southern wall was closed up, the only apertures being two loopholes.
There was nothing to indicate that it ever had any connection with the
moat, and the only access to the interior was on the north side, within
the Ballium wall. It was used as a gunpowder store, and was only one
storey in height, no trace remaining of the second storey which originally
existed. The first step taken was to remove the whole of the masonry
which had been built up against the Tower; this disclosed the old front
as well as an arch on the south side. The return walls extended ten feet,
and were built with their southern face in the moat, having two half arches
turned against the moat wall, and when the masonry blocking up the
arch in the south wall and these two half arches was removed, it at once
became evident that formerly the water in the moat had flowed through
the half arches and across the centre arch. By clearing away this masonry
the wall of the moat itself was disclosed, and was found to be of an
earlier date than the architecture of the Tower itself. On the ground
floor there is a chamber with a finely groined roof of the late thirteenth
-----File: 287.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>The White Tower, showing the Exterior of St. John's Chapel
and remains of the Roman Wall</i>]
-----File: 288.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 289.png---------------------------------------------------------
or early fourteenth century. The following is the actual restoration done
to the Cradle Tower. The wall built up in the moat under the centre
arch and under the two half-turned arches has been cleared away, and
the outer walls have all been restored to their original condition. An
additional storey and turret have been erected on the same plan as the
old building. The corbels in the groined roof of the ground floor
chamber, which were broken off, have been replaced by new ones copied
from a single corbel that remained. A wooden grating, after the pattern
of an old doorway in the Byward Tower, has been fitted to the central
arch, whilst the space between that arch and the moat has been boarded
over.

A further discovery was made during the restoration of this tower. In
the space between the bridge over the moat to the east of the Cradle
Tower and the Well Tower, stood a modern building used as a storehouse
by the Ordnance Department, and this being pulled down, excavations
in its foundations, made by the Board of Works, have disclosed a brick
paving and some loopholes in the outer Ballium wall, which has helped
to identify this space as the site of the garden belonging to the Queen's
apartments, when the royal palace stood within the Tower walls. This
palace occupied the space bounded by a line running exactly from the
south angle of the White Tower to the Broad Arrow Tower, thence south
along the inner Ballium wall to the Salt Tower, thence west to the Wakefield
Tower, and north to the south-west angle of the White Tower. A
portion of this space is now occupied by the Ordnance Stores and the
Control Office. Nearly opposite to, and to the west of the Cradle Tower,
and on the south side of the royal Palace, stood the Lanthorn Tower
(now rebuilt). The Queen's apartments extended from the Lanthorn
Tower to the south-east angle of the White Tower, and the space recently
cleared, formed the Queen's private garden, the loopholes in the Ballium
wall bounding the garden on the south side giving a view of the river.

From these discoveries it would appear that the Cradle Tower was the
entrance to the Queen's apartments from the river, and the opinion is
confirmed by the fact that the inner faces of the walls on which the
centre arch stands, are worked and pointed as outside facing, probably
to withstand the action of the water as they would be covered when
the moat was full. There is space above the arch for a portcullis and
grooves in the jambs, but it is not large enough for portcullis slides. In
the entrance on the north or land side, however, both the space and
grooves show that there was a portcullis there, and the chamber on the
east side has no outlet, except into the centre chamber or gateway--from
which it would seem that it was a guard-room for the use of a warder
while on duty at the gate. And the name of the Tower strengthens this
idea, "Cradle" being the old Saxon word "cradel," meaning a movable
bed. The hypothesis is that there was a hoist or lift by which a boat,
after passing through the archway, was lifted on to the floor of the gateway.
On comparing the groining of the chamber with the groined chamber
-----File: 290.png---------------------------------------------------------
in the Well Tower, the greater beauty of that in the Cradle Tower is
at once apparent, which would point to its being part of a royal dwelling.
It is also nearly opposite the site of the Lanthorn Tower, which was
the entrance to the Queen's apartments. The access to and from the
Thames and the Queen's apartments of the Palace, would be from the
Cradle Tower to the moat, under St Thomas's Tower and through Traitor's
Gate, and would be the only communication with the river. In 1641
the Cradle Tower appears to have been used as a prison, according to
"A particular of the Names of the Towers and Prison Lodgings in his
Majesty's Tower of London, taken out of a paper of Mr William Franklyn,
sometime Yeoman Warder, dated March 1641,"in which appears, "Cradle
Tower--A prison lodging, with low gardens where the drawbridge was
in former times."

The War Office have determined to build stores on the Queen's gardens,
and consequently the loopholes in the old Ballium wall will be blocked
up. The site will thus be lost for further investigation, and as the Office
of Works has no power to prevent these works being carried out, all that
has been exposed of one of the most interesting portions of the older
part of the Tower will be lost.
-----File: 291.png---------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: <i>View of S.^t[**F1: S^t. ?] Peter's Chapel in 1817.</i>]
-----File: 292.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 293.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX V

THE BLOODY TOWER


Owing to serious signs of weakness in the upper portions of the walls
of the Bloody Tower, it was considered an absolute necessity to carefully
renew the Kentish Rag facing in various places. The work has been
thoroughly well executed stone by stone, all the old stones that were
sound being re-used, and the whole of the walls have been greatly
strengthened by what is technically known as "tying in." It was found
that the Tower had been repaired in this same manner about the time
of Henry VIII., and probably on more than one occasion. The heart
of the walling is in excellent preservation, and is the original Norman
Transitional masonry with a liberal proportion of chalk. The parapet
has been restored to its original embattlemented character. A brick
wall, which had closed the historical entrance to Raleigh's Walk for the
last hundred years, has been cleared away, leaving the passage open as
in the days of Cranmer and Raleigh; this wall was built to prevent
the south-west angle of the Tower falling down, and was an economical
vandalism on the part of the authorities of the time. Another act of
vandalism was committed by some former occupant of the Tower, who
had cut out a cupboard for blacking brushes in the solid masonry immediately
behind the springing of the large arch over the portcullis,
thereby seriously jeopardising the stability of the arch; happily this
has been remedied by the recent restoration. A fine arch over the
northern portcullis that had completely disappeared, has been replaced,
and early English Gothic windows of stone with lead lights have been
fixed throughout the Tower, in the room of the Georgian windows with
common double-hung deal sashes. Stone chimney-stacks have also
taken the place of the incongruous chimney-stacks of brick, and a very
interesting octagonal stone turret, which had been patched with brick,
has been restored to its original condition. This turret is circular inside,
and is about five feet in diameter; a curious internal window was found
about a foot higher than Raleigh's Walk, and as it answers no purpose,
it is supposed that it was used for supervising the prisoners. In a jamb
of the recess immediately over the northern portcullis several inscriptions
were brought to light, but of these only the letters R. D. were legible,
-----File: 294.png---------------------------------------------------------
which, seeing the acquaintance that both Robert Devereux, Earl of
Essex, or Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, had with the Tower, has
not unnaturally led to the conclusion that the initials belong to one
or other of these royal favourites.

The Bloody Tower is of the Norman Transitional period, but the
groining as well as the gates on the south side--those on the north
side have been removed--are Tudor. The massive bottom rails of these
gates were destroyed to allow of an injudicious raising of the road surface
many years ago. It is said that the road was raised from two to three
feet, probably to overcome some difficulty of draining, but whatever
the reason, the fine gates suffered both in effect and materially. On
the west front of the Tower there is an early English doorway which
has been "Tudorised," its outer arch being modern Norman Transitional.

The original freestone used in the building of the Bloody Tower
was procured from the neighbourhood of Red Hill, and in the old
records is called "Rygate" stone. It is known at the present time as
Gatton, but the quarries are no longer worked. The fine old arches over
the main entrance are still in this "Rygate" stone, an interesting survival,
since the whole of the external stone dressings in this material on the
Tower were superseded by Caen stone from Normandy in the reign of
Henry VIII. This was a deplorable error of judgment, for notwithstanding
the enormous amount of Caen stone used throughout the Tower in
this reign, scarcely a trace of it now remains. The modern restorations
to the interior have been carried out in the "pinny bed of Chilmark,"
a stone closely resembling the Rygate or Gatton stone, but much more
durable, whilst Kelton stone from the neighbourhood of Rutland has been
employed for the battlements and other external dressings. All the main
walling was carried out in Kentish Rag stone, which was procured from
the contractor who built the new guard buildings for the War Department.
In the records of Henry VIII.'s time, this Kentish Rag is called
the "hard stone of Kent." The stone used in those days was undoubtedly
superior to that used by Salvin over fifty years ago, as
is shown by the comparison between the restored Beauchamp Tower and
the White Tower. Soft stones, such as Caen or Bath, absorb a
great deal of moisture, and their injudicious use consequently hastens
the decay of any building in which they are used. Much of the mischief
in the Bloody Tower was doubtless caused by the decay of the Caen
stone, and also the neglect in pointing the joints. It is generally thought
amongst those most concerned, that the restoration of the Bloody Tower
is the most careful and complete of any of the works of preservation
carried out in the old fortress, and it is now judged to be safe from all
fear of collapse.
-----File: 295.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX VI

STAINED GLASS IN THE TOWER


A quantity of stained glass panels were found in the crypt of St John's
Chapel, in which some interesting and valuable fragments, mostly incomplete
in themselves, of heraldic glass of the sixteenth century and of
small pictorial subjects, were mixed with modern and valueless glass of
subordinate design. The whole was carefully examined by Messrs John
Hardman, who separated the ancient from the modern glass, and using
delicate leads to repair the numerous fractures of the former, and setting
the various fragments in lozenges of plain glass, filled the eight windows of
the Chapel with the following subjects:--

The first window in the south front, entering from the west.--A coat of
arms with the words "Honi soit qui mal y pense" around it on the upper
portion; a sepia painting in the centre representing the Deity and two
angels appearing to a priest, with flames rising from an altar. In the lower
portion is another sepia painting with the Deity depicted with outstretched
arms, one hand on the sun, the other on the moon, and the earth rolling in
clouds at the feet. This is generally supposed to be emblematical of the
Creation, but has been suggested as representative of the Saviour as the
Light of the World.

The second window has a head and bust near the top, with a peculiar
cap and crown. The centre is a sepia representing the expulsion of Adam
and Eve from the Garden of Eden, and the guardian angel. At the
bottom there is another sepia depicting a village upon a hill, probably a
distant view of Harrow.

The third window has at the top a figure of Charles I. in sepia; in
the centre a knight in armour, skirmishing, and at the bottom what appears
to be a holly bush with the letters H. R.

The fourth window has a negro's head with a turban in the upper
portion; in the centre a sepia of Esau returning from the hunt to seek
Isaac's blessing, Rebecca and Jacob being in the background. Near the
bottom is another sepia of the exterior of a church, probably Dutch.

The fifth window, and the last of the series facing south, has a coat of
arms and motto like those in the first window; in the centre, a sepia of the
anointing of David by Samuel; and near the bottom, Jehovah in clouds,
-----File: 296.png---------------------------------------------------------
with the earth and shrubs bursting forth. This is probably emblematical
of the Creation.

The south-east apsidal window has the coat of arms and royal motto
as before, with two smaller coats of arms and the same motto below, a
royal crown and large Tudor rose being near the bottom.

The eastern window (in the centre of the apse) has a crown with
fleur-de-lys and leopards at the top, and in the centre the small portcullis
of John of Gaunt and the wheatsheaf of Chester. These are by far the
best heraldic devices in the whole series of windows.

The north-east window has a very imperfect coat of arms with fleur-de-lys
and leopard, as well as two other coats with the royal motto. There
is also a device which might be taken to represent the letter M, but which
is probably the inverted water bottles of the Hastings family. Daggers
are quartered upon the other coats of arms. At the bottom of this
window is a Tudor rose and several fragments of glass much confused.

The glass has been placed in the windows with great care, the subjects
being made as complete as the broken fragments permitted. Each of
the eight windows is ornamented with leaded borders.
-----File: 297.png---------------------------------------------------------




APPENDIX VII

LIST OF THE CONSTABLES OF THE TOWER


/*
Geoffrey de Mandeville
William de Mandeville
Geoffrey de Mandeville[A]                        1140
Richard de Lacy                                  1153
Garnerius de Isenei
William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely                 1189
Walter de Coutances, Archbishop of Rouen         1192
Roger Fitz Renfred
Roger de la Dane                         }
Geoffrey de Mandeville                   } During the reign of
Eustace de Greinville                    }       John.
Archbishop of Canterbury                 }
Walter de Verdun                        }
Stephen de Segrave                      }
Hugh de Wyndlesore                      }
Randulph, Bishop of Norwich             }
John de Boville                         }
Thomas de Blunvil                       }
Thomas Fitz Archer                      }
Ralph de Gatel                          }
Hubert de Burgh                   1232  }
W. de St Edmund                         }
Geoffrey de Crancumb                    } During the reign of
Hugh Giffard                            }     Henry III.
Archbishop of York } jointly            }
Bertram de Crioyl  }                    }
Peter de Vallibus                       }
John de Plessitus                       }
Peter de Blund                          }
Aymor Thorimbergh                       }
Inbert Puglys                           }
Richard de Culworth                     }
Richarde de Tilbury                     }
Hugh le Bigod                     1258  }

[Footnote A: The office had been hereditary, but ceased to be so under Stephen.]
*/
-----File: 298.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*
John Mansel                             }
Hugh le Despenser                       }
Roger de Leyburn                   1265 }
Hugh Fitz Otho                          }
John Walerand   } jointly               } During the reign of
John de la Lind }                       }     Henry III.
Alan la Touch                           }
Thomas de Ippegrave                     }
Stephen de Eddeville                    }
Hugh Fitz Otho                          }
Walter, Archbishop of York               }
John de Burgh                            }
Anthony Bek                              }
Ranulph de Dacre                         }
Ralph de Sandwich                        }
Ralph de Berners                         } During the reign of
Ralph de Sandwich                        }     Edward I.
John de Crumwell                         }
Roger de Swynneston                      }
Stephen Segrave                          }
Bishop of Exeter                         }
John de Gisors                           }
Thomas de Wake                          }
John de Crumwell                        }
William de Monte Acuto                  }
Nicholas de la Beche                    }
Robert de Dalton                        } During the reign of
John Darcy } father and son             }     Edward III.
John Darcy }                            }
Bartholomew de Burghersh                }
Robert de Morley                        }
Richard de la Vache                     }
Alan Buxhill                            }
Sir Thomas Murrieuse                     }
Edward, Earl of Rutland                  }
Ralph de Nevill                          } During the reign of
Edward, Duke of Albemarle                }     Richard II.
Thomas de Rempston                       }
Edward, Duke of York                    }
Robert de Morley                        }
John Dabrichcourt                       } During the reign of
William Bourghchier                     }     Henry V.
Roger Aston                             }
John, Duke of Exeter                     } During the reign of
James Fienes, Lord Say                   }     Henry VI.
*/
-----File: 299.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*
John Lord Taploft, Earl of Worcester     }
John, Lord Dudley                        }
Richard, Lord Dacre                      } During the reign of
John Howard, Lord Howard                 }     Edward IV.
Marquis of Dorset                        }
Sir Robert Brackenbury
Earl of Oxford
Sir Thomas Lovel                         } During reigns of
Sir William Kingston                     }    Henry VIII. and
Sir John Gage                            }    Edward VI.
Lord Clinton[A]
Sir Edward Bray
Lord Howard of Walden
Lord Coltington                                  1640
General Sir Thomas Fairfax                       1647
Sir John Robinson                                1660
James, Earl of Northampton                       1678
Lord Allington                                   1680
George, Lord Dartmouth                           1684
Lord Lucas                                       1688
Charles, Earl of Carlisle                        1715
Henry, Earl of Lincoln                           1724
Charles, Duke of Bolton                          1724
Henry, Viscount Lonsdale                         1726
Montague, Earl of Abingdon
Algernon, Earl of Essex
Richard, Earl of Rivers
George, Earl of Northampton
John, Earl of Leicester                          1731
Charles, Lord Cornwallis                         1741
Lord George Lennox
Marquis Cornwallis                               1785
Francis, Marquis of Hastings                     1806
Arthur, Duke of Wellington                       1826
Viscount Combermere                              1852
Sir John Fox Burgoyne                            1865
Sir George Pollock                               1871
Sir William Gomm                                 1872
Sir Charles Yorke                                1875
Sir F. Fenwick Williams                          1881
General Sir R. C. Dacres                         1881
Lord Napier of Magdala                           1886
General Sir Daniel Lysons                        1890
Sir Frederick C. Stephenson                      1898

[Footnote A [** F1 possibly B]: Appointed by Lady Jane Grey's party. There is no record of Constables during the
reign of Elizabeth, Sir John Gage being restored to office at Mary's succession.]
*/
-----File: 300.png---------------------------------------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 301.png---------------------------------------------------------




INDEX


/*
Abel, Dr, execution of, i. 159

Abergavenny, Lord, i. 131

Albert, Prince, i. 58, 59, 60; ii. 171

Alençon, Duke d', i. 63

Allen, Cardinal, i. 213

Andrews, Colonel Eusebius, execution of, ii. 49

Anne Boleyn, i. 35, 39;
  State visit to the Tower, 131;
  coronation, 132;
  arrest, 143, 144;
  trial, 146;
  execution, 149

Anne of Cleves, i. 157

Apsley, Sir Allen, i. 41 and <i>n.</i>, 42, 112

Arden, John, i. 50

Armagh, Archbishop of, murder of, i. 34

Armour in the White Tower, i. 64-73

Armoury, the, destroyed by fire, ii. 142-144

Arnold's Chronicles, quoted, i. 117

Arques Castle, i. 61

Artillery at the Tower, i. 73

Arundel, Sir Thomas, execution of, i. 179, 180

Arundel, Philip Howard, Earl of, i. 31, 32, 214

Arundel, Richard Fitzalan, Earl of, arrest of, i. 95;
  execution of, 96

Arundel, Earl of, quarrel with Lord Spencer, ii. 27

Arundel, Humphrey, i. 180

Aske, Robert, i. 151

Askew, Anne, story of, i. 162-164

Athol, Earl of, i. 85, 86

Atterbury, Bishop, ii. 112

Audley, Mervin, Lord, execution of, ii. 32

Axe, the processional, i. 12, 25, 26, 70, 73; ii. 133

Axten, Colonel, execution of, ii. 58


Babington, Anthony, i. 215

Bacon, Francis, i. 48;
  imprisonment of, ii. 27

Badlesmere, Lady, i. 87

Bagot, Sir Francis, execution of, i. 151

Bailly, Charles, i. 33, 209

Balfour, Sir William, ii. 33, 37, 38

Baliol, King, i. 85

Ballard, trial and execution of, i. 215

Ballium Wall, the, i. 13, 14, 43, 44, 46, 51;
  restoration of, ii. 169
*/
-----File: 302.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Balmarino[**Balmerino], Lord, i. 40; ii. 116, 117;
  trial of, 118-120;
  execution of, 121-125

Banqueting Hall, i. 57;
  explosion in, ii. 145

Barkstead, Colonel, execution of, ii. 61

Barlow, Lucy, ii. 51, 52

Barnes, Dr Robert, execution of, i. 159

Barracks, the, ii. 145

Bathurst, Earl, i. 42

Battista, Giovanni, i. 46, 47

Beauchamp Tower, the, i. 14, 29-34, 44; ii. 94;
  restoration of, 169

Becket, Thomas à, i. 81, 83

Bedingfield, Sir Henry, i. 200

Bedingfield, Sir Thomas, ii. 42

Bell, Mr Doyne, i. 35, 36, 39

Bell, Dr, i. 127

Bell Tower, the, i. 14, 28, 29

Berkeley, Sir Maurice, i. 197

Besant, Sir Walter, quoted, i. 2, 6

Birch, Mr G. H., i. 2 <i>n.</i>, 44 <i>n.</i>, 61; ii. 93, 114 <i>n.</i>

Birds at the Tower, i. 74

Biron, Duke de, i. 228

Bishops, the Seven, ii. 86, 87

Block, the, i. 70; ii. 133

Blood, Colonel, i. 19, 42, 45; ii. 67-71

Bloody Tower, the, i. 12, 13, 17, 20, 21, 22; ii. 94;
  restoration of, 169, 175, 176

Blount, Sir Michael, i. 41, 217

Blount, Sir Richard, i. 41

Blunt, Sir Christopher, execution of, i. 229

Board of Ordinance, the, i. 68

Bonner, Bishop, i. 163, 201

Bowyer Tower, the, i. 45;
  part destroyed by fire, ii. 144

Brackenbury, Sir Robert, i. 116

Brass Mount Battery, i. 52

Brick Tower, the, i. 45

Bridges, the four, i. 9

Bridges, Sir John, i. 192, 193

Britton and Brayley, quoted, i. 44, 46, 64, 67

Broad Arrow Tower, the, i. 6, 46;
  restoration of, ii. 169

Brooke, Duke, ii. 6, 7

Brooke, George, ii. 2;
  execution of, 5

Brooke, William, ii. 7

Brown, Sir Anthony, i. 169, 177, 192
*/
-----File: 303.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Brown, Horatio F., ii. i[** 1?] <i>n.</i>

Bruce, David, i. 87, 88

Buckingham, Edward Bohun, Duke of, i. 127,
  trial and execution of, 128-130

Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke of, bribed by Raleigh, ii. 8, 20;
  assassinated, 31

Buckingham, George Villiers, 2nd Duke of, five times imprisoned in the Tower, ii. 62

Bulwark, the, i. 9, 112

Bulwer, Sir John, execution of, i. 151

Bulwer, Lady, burnt at Smithfield, i. 151

Burchet, Peter, i. 212

Burdett, Sir Francis, ii. 139, 140

Burgoyne, Sir John, i. 25, 42

Burley, Sir Simon, execution of, i. 94

Burnet, Bishop, ii. 74, 77, 78, 79

Byron, Sir John, ii. 37, 38

Byward Tower, the, i. 10, 11, 21, 44


Cade's Insurrection, i. 104, 105

Campion, hanged at Tyburn, i. 213

Cannon in the Tower, i. 73

Capel, Lord, escape and recapture of, ii. 46, 47;
  execution of, 47

Carew, Sir Alexander, execution of, ii. 44

Carew, Sir George, i. 218

Carew, Sir Nicholas, execution of, i. 152

Carew, Sir Peter, i. 194

Carr, Robert, <i>see</i> Earl of Somerset, ii. 17

Catherine of Arragon, i. 121, 123, 125

Catherine Howard, i. 35, 39;
  execution of, 160, 161

Catherine Parr, i. 162, 165, 170

Cato Street Conspiracy, the, ii. 140

Cecil, Sir Robert, i. 218, 219, 223; ii. 4

Chaplain's House, the, i. 34

Charles I., journey to Spain, i. 19;
  armour of, 72;
  treatment of Lord Loudon, ii. 33, 34;
  betrayal of Stafford, 34, 35;
  plot to seize the Tower, 36, 37

Charles II. and Colonel Blood, i. 42; ii. 70, 71;
  executions of regicides, 56;
  death of Sir Harry Vane, 59;
  visit to the Tower, 59;
  coronation, 59;
  courage during the Fire, 62;
  Papistical tendencies, 73;
  visit to the Tower on the day of Essex's death, 76, 77

Chelmsford, Lord, ii. 146

Cholmondeley, Sir Richard and Lady, i. 40, 41, 127

Clarence, George, Duke of, i. 44, 108, 111, 112

Clarke, Mr G. J., quoted, i. 6, 44, 53, 57, 61

Clement, Gregory, execution of, ii. 56
*/
-----File: 304.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Clifford, Gervase, Lord, imprisonment and suicide of, ii. 26

Cobham Tower, i. 30

Cobham, Thomas, i. 34

Cobham, Henry, Lord, i. 30; ii. 2, 3, 5;
  his career and death, 5, 6;
  his writings, 7

Cobham Family, history of the, ii. 5, 6, 7

Coke, Sir Edward, i. 27, 48; ii. 18, 27

Cold Harbour, i. 6, 23, 24

Combermere, Lord, i. 25

Commines, Philip de, quoted, i. 112, 117

Constable of the Tower, office of, i. 25

Constable Tower, the, i. 46

Constable, Sir Robert, execution of, i. 151

Conyers, Sir John, ii. 37, 38, 43

Cooke, Lawrence, execution of, i. 159, 160

Cooper, Sir Anthony Ashley, ii. 53

Corbet, Miles, execution of, ii. 61

Cornwallis, Sir Thomas, i. 198

Council Chamber, the, i. 26, 27, 57

Courtenay, Edward, Earl of Devonshire, i. 188

Courtenay, Henry, Marquis of Exeter, execution of, i. 152, 153

Coventry, Sir William, ii. 65, 66

Cowdray, paintings formerly at, i. 169, 170

Coxe, Dr, Bishop of Ely, i. 177

Cradle Tower, the, i. 50, 52,;
  restoration of, ii. 169, 172, 173;
  recent discoveries, 173

Cranmer, Archbishop, i. 21, 144, 147, 158, 187, 189

Cromarty, Earl of, ii. 116, 117, 118, 120, 133

Cromwell, Oliver, Constable of the Tower, ii. 38;
  plots to assassinate, 51, 52

Cromwell, Thomas, i. 19, 133, 143, 144, 148, 150, 151, 152;
  made Earl of Essex, 155;
  compared with Robespierre, 155;
  his career, 155-157;
  his fall, 157;
  execution of, 158

Cruikshank, G., ii. 143

Cuffe, Henry, execution of, i. 230

Cumberland, Earl of, i. 72


Dacre, Lord, execution of, i. 159

Daniell, John, i. 46, 47

Danvers, Sir Charles, execution of, i. 229

Darcey, Lord, execution of, i. 151, 153

Darcy, Sir John, i. 88

Darnley, Lord, i. 181, 206

Dartmouth, William Legge, Lord, i. 67

David, King of Scotland, i. 58

Davison, Elizabeth's secretary, i. 216

de la Motte, Henry Francis, hanged at Tyburn, ii. 137
*/
-----File: 305.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

de Ros, Lord, quoted, i. 13, 37, 42, 56, 59, 149, 163; ii. 111, 112

Derwentwater, Earl of, ii. 102, 103;
  execution of, 104, 126

Desborough, Nathaniel, ii. 67

Desmond, Earl of, ii. 12

Develin Tower, the, i. 43, 52, 53

de Vere, Aubrey, Earl of Oxford, i. 109

Devereux Tower, the, i. 43

Dick, Rev. R., quoted, i. 33

Digby, Sir Everard, execution of, ii. 9

Dighton, one of the murderers of the two Princes, i. 116, 117

Dillon, Viscount, i. 65, 69, 71, 211 <i>n.</i>

Draper, Hugh, i. 48

Dudley, Edmund, execution of, i. 124

Dudley, Lord Guildford, i. 34, 182, 185, 189;
  execution of, 192;
  buried in the Tower, 194

Dudley, Lord Harry, 187

Dudley family, the, i. 31, 32

Dungeons, in the Wakefield Tower, i. 18;
  White Tower, 26;
  Flint Tower, 44;
  Salt Tower, 47;
  St John's Chapel, 55


Edward I., i. 83;
  the Tower under, 85, 86

Edward II., the Tower under, i. 86, 87

Edward III., i. 36, 44;
  the Tower under, 88, 89

Edward IV., murder of sons of, i. 20, 21, 22, 55, 112, 114-118;
  defeats the Lancastrians, 107;
  coronation of, 108, 109;
  battle of Tewkesbury, 110;
  his additions to the Tower, 112;
  death, 112

Edward VI., coronation of, i. 169, 170;
  execution of Somerset, 176, 178;
  further executions, 179, 180

Edwards, Talbot, i. 42; ii. 68, 69, 70

Eliot, Sir John, imprisonment of, ii. 28, 29;
  death, 29, 30

Elizabeth, Queen, i. 10;
  figure of, on a wooden horse, 56;
  and the Countess of Lennox, 28, 206;
  birth, 132;
  relations with Lord Seymour, 170, 171;
  and Bishop Coxe, 177;
  visit to the Tower with Queen Mary, 188;
  imprisoned in the Tower, 198;
  released, 200;
  visit to the Tower before her coronation, 202;
  her treatment of Catherine Grey, 203;
  her struggle with Mary Stuart, 206;
  the Ridolfi plot, 208;
  proceedings against the Jesuits, 212, 213;
  State prisoners, 214;
  the Babington plot, 215;
  imprisonment of Raleigh, 218;
  fall of Essex, 221;
  her last days, 230

Elizabeth, Queen of Henry VII., i. 60;
  coronation of, 121
*/
-----File: 306.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Elizabeth Woodville, i. 109, 114

Empson, Sir Richard, execution of, i. 124

Essex, Arthur Capel, Earl of, ii. 74;
  death in the Tower, 75, 76, 77

Essex, Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of, i. 65, 80, 81

Essex, Robert Devereux, Earl of, i. 35, 43;
  armour of, 72;
  an enemy of Raleigh, 221;
  his person and position, 221;
  failure of his Irish expedition, 222, 223;
  imprisonment and trial of, 223;
  execution of, 224

Essex, Robert, Earl of, 229

Eu, Counts of, i. 88, 103

Evelyn, John, ii. 71, 83


Fabyan, quoted, i. 112-117

Fairfax, Sir Thomas, ii. 38

Fawkes, Guy, i. 26, 55; ii. 9

Feckenham, i. 191, 193

Felton, John, assassination of Buckingham, i. 29, 76; ii. 31;
  execution of, 32

Fenwick, Sir John, execution of, ii. 91

Ferrers, Lawrence Shirley, Earl, hanged at Tyburn, ii. 133-135

Fire of 1841, the, i. 27; ii. 142-144

Fisher, John, Bishop of Rochester, i. 29, 132, 133;
  imprisonment, 134;
  trial and execution, 135-138;
  buried in the Tower, 142

Fitz, Colonel, ii. 53

Fitzgerald, Gerald, Earl of Kildare, i. 142

Fitzgerald, Thomas, siege of Dublin Castle by, i. 142;
  hanged, 143

Flambard, Astronomer-Royal, i. 60

Flambard, Bishop, i. 54, 57, 79, 80

Flete, John de, i. 65

Flint Tower, the, i. 43

Forde, Thomas, i. 47

Forrest, one of the murderers of the two Princes, i. 116

Fraser, Sir Simon, i. 86

Freeman, Professor, i. 53, 54, 80


Gage, J., i. 47

Gage, Sir Thomas, i. 200

Galligman's Tower, i. 53

Garden Tower, the, i. 20

Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, i. 185, 188, 199

Gardiner, Mr S. R., quoted, i. 95, 97, 110, 113, ii. 114

Gardner, Sir James, ii. 42

Garnet, Father, i. 48;
  execution of, ii. 8, 9

Gates, Sir John, execution of, i. 187

"Gentleman-gaoler," the, i. 12
*/
-----File: 307.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Gerard, Father, i. 44, 48-51; ii. 8, 9

Gerard, Thomas, execution of, i. 159

Gerrard, John, execution of, ii. 51

Ghosts in the Tower, i. 26, 27

Gibbons, Grinling, i. 46

Gladstone and Sir Thomas More compared, i. 139

Gloucester, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of, i. 84

Gloucester, Humphrey, Duke of, i. 103

Gloucester, Richard, Duke of, i. 108, 110;
  made Protector, 112;
  his portrait, 113;
  imprisons his nephews, and declares them bastards, 114, 115;
  crowned 115. [** F1 . ?]
  <i>See</i> Richard III.

Gloucester, Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of, revolt of, i. 94;
  arrest of, 95

Gloucester, Duchess of, i. 104

Glendower, Owen, i. 100

Gordon, Lord George, ii. 137

Gorges, Sir Arthur, i. 218

Gough, Sir Mathew, i. 105

Governor's House, <i>see</i> King's House

Green, one of the murderers of the two Princes, i. 116

Grey, Lady Catherine, i. 191;
  marriage with Lord Hertford, 203;
  imprisonment of, 204;
  death of, 205

Grey, Lady Jane, i. 33, 34, 35;
  marriage with Guildford Dudley, 182;
  enters the Tower in state, 182;
  imprisonment of, 185;
  trial of, 189;
  letters to her father, 190, 191;
  execution of, 192-4;
  buried in the Tower, 194

Grey, Lord John, i. 194

Grey, Lord Leonard, i. 143;
  execution of, 143, 159

Grey, Sir Richard, execution of, i. 114

Grey de Wilton, Lord, imprisonment and death of, ii. 2, 5, 7

Griffin, Edward, ii. 92, 93

Grillot, i. 45

Gundulf, Bishop of Rochester, i. 6, 54, 62

Gunpowder Plot, the, ii. 8

Gurney, Sir Richard, ii. 42


Hacker, Colonel, execution of, ii. 58

Haiward and Gascoigne's plan of the Tower, i. 6, 7, 23, 43, 75

Hales, Sir Robert, murder of, i. 90, 91, 92

Hamilton, James, Duke of, ii. 45;
  execution of, 46

Hamilton, Sir Stephen, execution of, i. 151

Harley, Robert, Earl of Oxford, imprisonment of, ii. 100

Harrington, James, ii. 56, 57

Harrison, Major-General Thomas, execution of, ii. 56
*/
-----File: 308.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Harvey, Sir George, ii. 9, 10

Hastings, Sir Edward, i, 198

Hastings, Lord, i. 35, 57;
  execution of, 114

Hengham, Ralph de, i. 86

Henry I., i. 6, 7, 81;
  imprisonment of Flambard by, 79

Henry III., i. 17, 36, 45, 51, 59, 76;
  buildings in the Tower due to, 82;
  obliged to take shelter in the Tower, 83

Henry IV., i. 98, 100

Henry V., i. 101, 102

Henry VI., his minority, i. 103;
  Cade's insurrection, 104, 105;
  deposition and imprisonment of, 108, 110;
  murder of, 19, 110

Henry VII., i. 120-123

Henry VIII., i. 16, 37;
  armour of, 71;
  marriage with Catherine of Arragon, 125;
  his executions, 126;
  marriage with Anne Boleyn, 131;
  execution of More and Fisher, 132 <i>et seq.</i>;
  execution of Anne Boleyn, 143 <i>et seq.</i>;
  marriage with Jane Seymour, 150;
  marriage with Anne of Cleves, 157;
  execution of Cromwell, 158;
  execution of Catherine Howard, 160;
  increasing cruelty, 166;
  imprisonment of Norfolk and Surrey, 166;
  death, 168

Henry, Duke of Normandy, i. 81

Henry, Prince of Wales, armour of, i. 72;
  friendship with Raleigh, ii. 12;
  death of, 16, 18

Hentzner, Paul, i. 8, 58, 66, 67, 69

Hertford, Lord, i. 203, 204, 205;
  marriage with Lady Catherine Grey, 203;
  imprisonment of, 204, 205

Hewet, Dr, execution of, ii. 52

Hocking, W. J., quoted, ii. 97, 99

Hogarth, his portrait of Lord Lovat, ii. 127

Holland, Earl of, execution of, ii. 46

Hopton, Sir Owen, i. 24, 213, 217

Hopton, Sir Ralph (afterwards Lord), ii. 41, 42.

Hotham, Sir John, and Captain, execution of, ii. 44

Hudson, Mr W. H., quoted, i. 74

Hungerford, Lord, execution of, i. 158, 159

Hussey, Lord, execution of, i. 151, 153

Hutchinson, Mrs, i. 21, 41 <i>n.</i>, 42, 112


Inner Ward, the, i. 12, 20, 45, 51


James I., portrait of, in the Council Chamber, i. 27;
  first visit to the Tower, ii. 1;
  his appearance, 4;
  treatment
*/
-----File: 309.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*
[** F1 cont. of sub-entry]of the Cobhams, 6, 7;
  treatment of Arabella Stuart, 13-15;
  betrayal of Raleigh, 23, 24

James II., Roman Catholicism, ii. 73, 84;
  visit to the Tower on the day of Essex's death, 76, 77;
  appointments of Roman Catholics at Oxford, 85;
  trial of the Seven Bishops, 86, 87;
  flight, 88, 89.[**delete the .]

James, Prince, of Scotland, imprisonment of, i. 100, 101

James, Colonel John, execution of, ii. 56

"Jane of the Tower," birth of, i. 87

Jean de Vienne, i. 88

Jerningham, Sir Henry, i. 196

Jerome, William, execution of, i. 159

Jewel House, the, i. 18, 45; ii. 68

Jews, imprisonment of, i. 55, 85

Jeffreys, Judge, i. 21; ii. 75, 79, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90

Joan of Kent, i. 60

John, King, the Tower besieged by, i. 82

John, King of France, i. 58, 88

Julius Caesar's Tower, i. 47;
  repairs in, 131


Kent, Hubert de Burgh, Earl of, i. 82

Kent, Thomas Holland, Earl of, i. 94, 96

Kenmure, Lord, ii. 102, 103;
  execution of, 104, 105

Keys, ceremony of receiving the, i. 22

King's House, i. 14, 20, 23, 24-28

Kildare, Gerald Fitzgerald, Earl of, i. 39

Kildare, Thomas Fitzgerald, Earl of, i. 34

Kilmarnock, Lord, i. 40; ii. 116, 117;
  trial of, 118-120;
  execution of, 121-124

Knighton, Sir W., i. 144, 145, 147, 148

Knights Templars, imprisonment of the, i. 87

Knyvett, Sir A., i. 164


Lambert, John, escape of, ii. 54;
  recaptured and banished, 54, 55

Lancaster, Duke of, i. 97.
  <i>See</i> Henry IV.

Lansdowne, George Granville, Earl of, ii. 95, 101

Lanthorn Tower, i. 6, 51, 52; ii. 173, 174;
  restoration of, 169

Latimer, Bishop, i. 15, 172, 187, 201

Laud, Archbishop, i. 21;
  imprisonment of, ii. 34;
  his room searched by Prynne, 39;
  trial and execution, 40

Lee, Sir Henry, i. 211

Legge's Mount, i. 52

Leicester, Robert Dudley, Earl of, i. 31, 66, 72

Lennox, Countess of, i. 28, 206;
  imprisonment of, 206
*/
-----File: 310.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Le Swifte, E., i. 27

Lieutenant of the Tower, office of, i. 25

Lilburne, Colonel John, ii. 48

Lion Gate and Tower, i. 7, 10

Lisle, Arthur Lisle, Viscount, death of, i. 161

Lithbury, Robert, i. 86

"Little Ease," i. 162; ii. 9

"Little Hell," i. 44

Llewellyn, death of, in escaping from the Tower, i. 83

Lollards, persecution of the, i. 101, 102.[**no end dots elsewhere]

London, Visscher's view of, in 1616, ii. 21, 22;
  the Fire, 62, 63;
  Hollar's view of London before and after the Fire, 62

London, Lord Mayor imprisoned, ii. 136, 137

Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, i. 9, 82

Lopez, plot of, i. 220;
  execution of, 221

Loudon, Lord, ii. 33, 34

Lovat, Simon Fraser, Lord, i. 39, 40, 70; ii. 126, 127;
  trial, 128, 129;
  execution, 130-133

Love, Christopher, execution of, ii. 50

Lucas, Lord, ii. 88, 89, 91

Lucy, Richard de, i. 81

Luke, Sir Thomas, ii. 26

Lumley, William, execution of, i. 151

Lumsford, Sir Thomas, ii. 38

Lysons, Sir Daniel, i. 25


Macaulay, Lord, i. 35

MacMahon, Colonel, attempted escape from the Tower, ii. 45;
  execution, 45

Maximilian, Emperor, armour given to Henry VIII. by, i. 68, 70, 71

Macquire, Lord, attempted escape from the Tower, ii. 44, 45;
  execution, 45

Main Guard, the, i. 22

Margaret, Queen, i. 108, 109, 110

Marlborough, Duke of, imprisonment of, ii. 91, 92

Mary, Queen, i. 171, 172;
  proclaimed Queen, 184;
  visit to the Tower, 187;
  coronation, 188;
  marriage with Philip of Spain, 198;
  imprisons Elizabeth, 198, 199;
  her persecutions, 201;
  death, 201

Mary Stuart, i. 181;
  struggle with Elizabeth, 206

Martin Tower, the, i. 27, 45, 46; ii. 68

Master of the King's Ordnance, office of, i. 67

Matilda, the Empress, i. 80, 81

Mayne, Cuthbert, i. 213

Menagerie, the, i. 7, 8
*/
-----File: 311.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Menteith, Earl of, i. 85

Merrick, Sir Gilley, execution of, i. 229

Meyrick, Dr S. R., i. 64, 66

Middle Tower, i. 9, 10

Middlesex, Lionel Cranfield, Earl of, imprisonment of, ii. 27

Milman, General George, i. 24; ii. 146, 171

Minories, the, i. 196

Mint, the, i. 13, 14; ii. 95-99

Mint Street, i. 13

Moat, the, i. 8, 9,

Molini, Nicolo, Venetian Ambassador, ii. 1 <i>n.</i>

Mohun, Lord, ii. 92

Monk, George, imprisonment of, ii. 44

Monmouth, James, Duke of, i. 28, 39, 43, 70; ii. 75;
  execution of, 81-83

Montague, Lord, i. 131

Montford, Simon de, i. 83

Montgomery, John de, i. 65

Mordaunt, Henry, Lord, imprisonment of, ii. 8, 9

Mordaunt, Henry, conspiracy of, ii. 52

More, Sir Thomas, i. 29, 117, 132;
  compared with Gladstone, 139;
  imprisonment and execution, 140, 142

Moreton, Sir William, ii. 43

Mortimers, the, i. 58, 87, 88

Morton, Bishop of Ely, i. 114, 117


Napier of Magdala, Lord, i. 25

Nevill, Sir Edward, i. 131;
  execution of, 152

Neville, Lady Anne, i. 108

Neville, Sir Henry, i. 208

Neville, Marmaduke, i. 31

Newton, Sir Isaac, i. 15; ii. 98

Nithsdale, Lord, i. 28; ii. 102, 103;
  escape of, 105-111

Norfolk, 2nd Duke of, i. 129

Norfolk, 3rd Duke of, i. 143, 146, 151, 161, 188, 189, 196;
  sentenced to death, 166;
  narrow escape, 168;
  death 168

Norfolk, 4th Duke of, i. 31, 207, 208;
  trial, 209;
  execution, 211

North Bastion, i. 52

Northumberland, Henry Percy, 8th Earl of, i. 214

Northumberland, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of, ii. 8, 9, 11

Northumberland, John Dudley, Duke of, i. 21, 39, 173, 174, 178, 179, 181, 182;
  arrested and imprisoned, 184;
  apostacy, 185, 186;
  execution, 187

Nottingham, Earl of, i. 94, 96


Oates, Titus, ii. 72, 73
*/
-----File: 312.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

O'Connor, Arthur, ii. 138, 139

Offley, Sir Thomas, i. 192

Okey, Colonel, attempt to seize the Tower, ii. 53;
  execution of, 61

Oldcastle, Sir John, i. 101, 102

Oldcorn, Father, execution of, ii. 8, 9

O'Neale, Daniel, ii. 43

Orleans, Charles of, i. 53, 57, 58, 63, 64, 103

Otho, Papal Legate, i. 84

Otway, death of, i. 76

Outer Ward, the, i. 10, 52

Overbury, Sir Thomas, i. 21;
  story of the murder of, ii. 16, 17

Owen, Sir John, ii. 46, 47, 48

Owen Tudor, i. 104


Palmer, Sir Thomas, execution of, i. 187

Parade, the, i. 24

Parkhurst, Sir W., i. 15

Parry, plot and execution of, i. 214, 215

Partridge, Sir Miles, execution of, i. 179, 180

Partridge, Nathaniel, i. 185, 186

Penn, William, i. 76; ii. 71, 72

Pennington, Sir Isaac, ii. 38, 44

Pepys, Samuel, i. 37; ii. 54, 58, 59, 62, 64-67, 96

Percy, Henry, i. 109

Percy, Sir Thomas, execution of, i. 151

Perrot, Sir John, imprisonment of, i. 216;
  death of, 217

Peverel, i. 31

Pierce, the Regalia saved by, ii. 143

Planché, J. R., i. 64

Pole, Arthur de la, i. 34, 206

Pole, Cardinal, i. 152, 153, 156

Pole, Edmund de la, i. 34, 206

Pole, Sir Geoffrey de la, i. 152;
  death in the Tower, 153

Pole, Henry de la, Lord Montagu, execution of, i. 152

Pole, <i>see</i> also Suffolk

Pope, Sir Thomas, i. 141

Princes, murder of the two, i. 20, 21, 22, 112-118;
  their bones found, 55

Prynne, William, visit to Laud in the Tower, ii. 38, 39


Queen's House, <i>see</i> King's House


Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 21, 22, 27, 56;
  marriage with Elizabeth Throgmorton, 218;
  imprisonment, 218;
  release, 220;
  an enemy of Essex, 221, 223, 228;
  second imprisonment, ii. 2, 3, 5, 8-12;
  his "History of the World," 10, 12, 18, 19,
*/
-----File: 313.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*
[** F1 cont. of sub-entry]released, 20;
  expedition to the West Indies, 21, 23;
  failure, 23, 24;
  trial, 24;
  execution, 25, 26

Raleigh, Lady, i. 76, 218, 219; ii. 8, 9, 10, 25

Raleigh's Walk, ii. 175

Ratcliffe, Charles, ii. 126

Rathbone, Captain, ii. 62, 63,[**P1: delete ,]

Record or Hall Tower, i. 17

Regalia, the, i. 18, 19, 45;
  Colonel Blood's attempt to steal, ii. 68-70;
  saved by Pierce in 1841, 143

Reynardson, Sir Abraham, ii. 43, 49

Richard I., i. 43, 82

Richard II., i. 10, 11;
  coronation of, 90;
  seeks refuge in the Tower, 90, 94;
  marriage with Isabel of France, 95;
  arrest of the Duke of Gloucester and others, 95;
  imprisonment in the Tower, 97;
  deposition of, 98;
  his character, 99

Richard III., murder of Henry VI. by, i. 19;
  and Lord Hastings, 57;
  coronation of, 115, 116;
  murder of the young princes, 116

Ridley, Bishop, imprisonment of, i. 187

Ridolfi Plot, the, i. 208, 209

Rivers, Earl, i. 110, 114

Robinson, Sir J., i. 37; ii. 62

Roches, Peter de, Bishop of Winchester, i. 82

Rochester, John Wilmot, Earl of, ii. 64

Rochford, Lord, execution of, i. 150

Rochford, Lady, i. 35;
  execution of, 160, 161

Roettier, J., i. 15; ii. 96, 97, 98

Roman remains, i. 2, 3, 55; ii. 171, 172

Roper, Margaret, i. 140 141, 142

Ross, Bishop of, i. 29, 208, 211

Ross, Earl of, i. 85

Russell, William, Lord, i. 43, 70; ii. 73, 74;
  trial, 75, 77, 78;
  execution, 79

Rye House Plot, the, ii. 73, 75


Salisbury, Earl of, i. 91

Salisbury, Countess of, i. 35, 39, 152, 153;
  execution of, 154

Salt Tower, the, i. 47;
  restoration of, ii. 169

Salutation Battery, i. 73

Salvin, i. 14, 17, 18, 30, 38, 51, 52, 62; ii. 169, 171

Sandwich, Ralph de, i. 36

Sandys, Sir William, i. 130

Sautre, William, i. 102

Savile, Henry, ii. 66

Saye, Lord, i. 105

Scaffold, site of the, i. 35;
  on Tower Hill, 75
*/
-----File: 314.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Scales, Lord, i. 105, 109

Scaramelli, Venetian envoy, ii. 1 <i>n.</i>

Scott, Thomas, execution of, ii. 58

Scott, Sir Walter, i. 31

Scottish prisoners in the Tower, i. 18; ii. 114-116, 155-167

Sensenhofer, Conrad, i. 71

Seton, Sir Christopher, i. 86

Seymour of Sudley, Lord, i. 170;
  arrest and death of, 171, 172

Seymour, Jane, i. 144;
  marriage with Henry VIII., 150

Seymour, Lady Jane, i. 203, 204

Seymour, William, ii. 3, 13, 14, 15, 16

Shakespeare, at the Tower, ii. 2

Sherin, execution of, i. 212

Shaftesbury, Lord, ii. 63, 73

Shrewsbury, Lady, ii. 13, 15

Sidney, Algernon, i. 20; ii. 73;
  execution of, 79, 80

Simnel, Lambert, i. 120, 121

Simon's "Petition Medal," ii. 98

Skelton, Sir Bevil, ii. 88

Slingsby, Sir Henry, execution of, ii. 52

Smeaton, Mark, i. 150

Somers, Will, i. 72

Somerset, Robert Carr, Earl of, ii. 17;
  imprisonment of, 18

Somerset, Protector, i. 11, 39, 170, 171;
  arrest, 173;
  release, 174;
  again arrested, 174;
  trial, 175;
  execution, 176, 177

Somerset, Duchess of, i. 188

Somerville, John, and family, i. 214

Southampton, Lord, i. 24, 222;
  imprisonment and trial, 223;
  released by James I., 229

Southwell, Sir Richard, i. 198

Spencer, Lord, quarrel with the Earl of Arundel, ii. 27

Spur-Yard, the, i. 9

St John's Chapel, i, 36, 55, 57, 58-60;
  stained glass in, 76-78; ii. 177, 178

St Ledger, Sir Anthony, i. 15

St Peter's Chapel, plate in, i. 16, 24, 35-43;
  stained glass in, 76

St Thomas' Tower, i. 12, 13, 14;
  fall of, 16, 17;
  repairs in, 131

Stafford, Sir Henry, i. 124

Stafford, Thomas, Lord, execution of, i. 201

Stafford, William Howard, Viscount, execution of, ii. 72, 73

Stained glass in the Tower, i. 76; ii. 177, 178

Stanhope, Sir Michael, execution of, i. 179, 180
*/
-----File: 315.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Stanley, Lord, i. 114

Stanley, Sir William, execution of, i. 122

Stephen, i. 17;
  residence in the Tower, 80

Stevenson, R. L., description of the Duke of Orleans, i. 63

Stillingfleet, Bishop, ii. 72

Store, Dr John, i. 33

Store House, the, i. 46

Stoughton, John, i. 47

Stourton, Lord, imprisonment of, ii. 8, 9

Stowe's "Survey," quoted, i. 6, 40, 75, 112, 157, 202, 228

Strafford, Earl of, ii. 21;
  committed to the Tower, 34;
  trial, 35;
  execution, 35, 36

Strafford, Edmund de, Lord Chancellor, i. 96

Stuart, Lady Arabella, ii. 2, 3, 13, 14, 15

Stubbs, Dr John, i. 212

Subterranean passages, i. 23, 44

Sudbury, Simon of, Archbishop of Canterbury, murder of, i. 90, 91, 92

Suffolk, Charles Brandon, Duke of, i. 66, 72, 127

Suffolk, Henry Grey, Duke of, i. 181, 182, 190, 194;
  trial and execution of, 195;
  discovery of his head, 196

Suffolk, Edmund de la Pole, Earl of, execution of, i. 126

Suffolk, John de la Pole, Duke of, i. 117, 126

Suffolk, William de la Pole, Duke of, i. 104, 105

Suffolk, Lord and Lady, imprisonment of, ii. 27

Surrey, Earl of, i. 146;
  execution of, 165, 168

Sutherland, Earl of, i. 85

Syndercombe, Miles, death of, ii. 52


Talbot, Sir Gilbert, i. 19; ii. 68

Talbot, Thomas, i. 34

Tankerville, Count of, i. 88

Taylor, Sir John, i. 38

Taylor, John, ii. 169, 171

Tempest, Nicholas, execution of, i. 151

Thanet, Lord, ii. 138, 139

Thistlewood, execution of, ii. 140, 141

Throgmorton, Francis, execution of, i. 214

Throgmorton, Sir John, i. 192

Torture, instruments of, i. 69

Torture chamber, the, i. 26, 48

Tower, the, first used as State prison, i. 79;
  besieged by citizens of London, 81, 82;
  besieged by King John, 82;
  handed over to Prince Louis of France, 82;
  seized by the Barons, 84;
  first woman
*/
-----File: 316.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*
[** F1 cont. of sub-entry]prisoner, 87;
  seized by Mortimer, 87;
  survey of, in 1336, 88;
  Tyler's Rebellion, 90-93;
  imprisonment and deposition of Richard II., 97-98;
  Cade's insurrection, 105;
  murder of the two Princes, 112-118;
  attacked for the last time, 196;
  Tower guards appointed, ii. 37;
  plot by Charles I. to seize, 36, 37;
  in the hands of the Parliament, 38, 41;
  constant escape of prisoners, 50;
  seized by the Royalists, 53;
  repairs in, 61;
  danger from the Fire, 61, 62;
  Pepys' story of hidden treasure, 64, 65;
  ceased to be a royal residence, 81;
  the mint, 95-99;
  Jacobite plot to seize, 112;
  Spanish treasure brought to, 135;
  last peer imprisoned in, 139;
  ceased to be a prison of State, 141;
  the Fire of 1841, 142-144;
  area of, 145;
  Fenian attempt to blow up, 145-147;
  rights and privileges of, 151;
  dates of restorations at, 169;
  new buildings, 169;
  recent discoveries, 171-174;
  stained glass in, 177, 178

Tower Green, i. 24, 25

Tower Hill, i. 75;
  last execution on, ii. 128

Tower Wharf, i. 10

Traitor's Gate, i. 12, 14, 16, 20

Trevelyan, Mr G. M., quoted, i. 91-93

Tudenham, Sir Thomas, execution of, i. 109

Tullibardine, Marquis of, ii. 116, 117

Tunstall, Bishop of Durham, i. 188

Turnbull, James, ii. 99

Turner, Mrs, ii. 17;
  execution of, 18

Tyler's Rebellion, i. 90

Tyrell, James, i. 116; execution of, 123

Tyrell, Sir William, execution of, i. 109


Vane, Sir Harry, execution of, ii. 57, 58

Vane, Sir Ralph, execution of, i. 179, 180

Vaux, Sir Nicholas, i. 130

Victoria, Queen, visit to the Tower, i. 150.[**no end dots elsewhere]


Waad (or Wade), Sir William, i. 27, 37, 48, 49, 50; ii. 10, 16

Wakefield Tower, the, i. 6, 17

Wallace, William, i. 86

Walpole, Sir Robert, imprisonment of, ii. 95

Walpole, Jesuit priest, i. 221

Walsingham, Sir Edmund, i. 146;
  epitaph of, ii. 2 <i>n.</i>

Walsingham, Secretary of State, i. 207, 215, 216
*/
-----File: 317.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Walworth, William, Lord Mayor, i. 90, 91

Warbeck, Perkin, insurrection of, i. 122;
  hanged, 123

Warders of the Tower, the, i. 11, 12

Warders' Parlour, the, i. 11

Warding Gate, the, i. 11

Wardrobe Gallery and Tower, the, i. 6, 46, 47; ii. 171

Warner, Sir Edward, i. 205

Wars of the Roses, the, i. 107, <i>et seq.</i>

Warwick, Ambrose Dudley, Earl of, i. 32, 33

Warwick, Edward Plantagenet, Earl of, i. 120;
  execution of, 121

Warwick, John Dudley, Earl of, i. 32, 33;
  death of, 200

Warwick, Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of, i. 30, 95

Waterford, Lord, i. 71

Well Tower, the, i. 52, 53;
  restoration of, ii. 169

Wellington, Duke of, i. 9, 25; ii. 145

Westcott, J. R., ii. 169

Weston, Sir John, i. 88

White, Thomas, Lord Mayor, i. 189

White Tower, the, i. 4, 5, 6, 45, 53-73;
  repairs in, 137;
  Fenian attempt to blow up, ii. 145-147;
  restoration of, 169;
  recent discoveries, 171, 172
*/
-----File: 318.png---------------------------------------------------------
/*

Wilkes, John, ii. 136

William I., i. 5, 62

William Rufus, i. 6, 47

Williams, Sir Fenwick, i. 25

Williams, John, Bishop of Lincoln, ii. 32, 33

Williamson, General, ii. 120, 129, 131

Wintoun, Lord, ii. 102, 103;
  escape of, 112

Wolsey, Cardinal, i. 127

Woodville, Elizabeth, i. 109, 114

Worcester, Edward Somerset, Marquis of, ii. 50, 51

Worcester, Earl of, armour of, i. 72

Wren, Sir Christopher, i. 45, 54, 62; ii. 93, 94, 172

Wriothesley, Sir Thomas, i. 163, 165

Wyatt, Sir Henry, story of, i. 118, 119

Wyatt, Sir Thomas, rebellion of, i. 194;
  attacks the Tower, 196;
  capture and execution of, 197

Wyatt's Rebellion, i. 30, 34, 56, 190, 194, 196, 197


Yeomen of the Guard, i. 12

Yeomen porter, the, i. 22

Yeomen Warders, i. 11, 12

Yorke, Sir Charles, i. 38

Yorke, Sir John, i. 15
*/


THE RIVERSIDE PRESS LIMITED, EDINBURGH
